THIS
MEETING IS BEING HELD
ELECTRONICALLY BUT WE INTEND TO
CONDUCT IT SIMILARLY TO AN
IN-PERSON MEETING, PUBLIC
COMMENT OR VIA TELEPHONE OR
ZOOME ONLY TO SPEAK DURING ANY
OF THE PUBLIC COME UP COME ON
OPPORTUNITIES PLEASE CALL TWO
ZERO SIX THREE THREE SEVEN NINE
SEVEN TWO THREE AND ENTER
MEETING I.D. NUMBER NINE THREE
FOUR SIX THREE EIGHT FIVE ZERO
SEVEN OR JOINVILLE BLINK.
THIS INFORMATION IS ALSO
AVAILABLE IN THE PUBLISHED
AGENDA IN THE PUBLIC NOTICES
SECTION OF THE CITY WEBSITE AND
ON THE BROADCAST OF THIS
MEETING ON CHANNEL 16 XRF
CALL-GIRL PLEASE AND NOT A
PROBLEM PLEASE SEE HEAR FROM
WHERE YOU'RE DIALING WHEN YOUR
NAME IS PHONE COUNCIL MEMBER
ACKMANN HERE ANN ARBOR
COMMISSIONER BROGAN HERE FROM
ANN ARBOR COMMISSIONER FLEW
WELLIN HERE AND ARBER
COMMISSIONER HAUTAMKI HERE
FROM ANN ARBOR.
COMMISSIONER HOOK OK
COMMISSIONER FULLER INFORMATION
ALBUM COMMISSIONER LIDDY HERE
FROM ANN ARBOR.
THANKS COMMISSIONER CARPENTER.
I BELIEVE HE IS ABSENT
COMMISSIONER XIKAR HERE FROM
ANN ARBOR
.
>> OK COMMISSIONER HUTCHINSON
HAS GIVEN HIS REGRETS THAT HE
WILL NOT BE ABLE TO ATTEND
COMMISSIONER LIU HERE FROM NY
TOWNSHIP COMMISSIONER MARGOLESE
AND LIEUTENANT MIKE SCHERBA
HERE FROM TYRONE TOWNSHIP AND
COMMISSIONER STUKA IS ALSO
ABSENT WITH THAT WE DO HAVE A
QUORUM.
>> THANK YOU AND I'D LIKE TO
WELCOME BACK COUNCIL MEMBER
AKMAN.
THANK YOU.
IT'S BEEN A YEAR BUT WE'RE
HAPPY TO SEE YOU BACK.
YOU AND ERIKA FLIPFLOPPING,
APPRECIATE YOU SEE ME BACK HERE
FOR AT LEAST ANOTHER YEAR SO
IT'S GOOD TO BE BACK.
EVERYBODY.
ALL RIGHT.
THERE ARE TWO ITEMS ON THE
AGENDA TONIGHT APPROVAL OF THE
AGENDA AND APPROVAL OF THE
MINUTES FROM NOVEMBER.
ARE THERE ANY MODIFICATIONS TO
THE CONSENT AGENDA SITTING
DOWN?
>> CAN I HAVE A MOTION TO
APPROVE THE CONSENT AGENDA AS
PRESENTED MOVE TO A PROCESS AND
BY A SECOND BY LARRY, ALL THOSE
IN FAVOR SAY YES OR RAISE YOUR
HAND.
OH, THOSE OPPOSED PLEASE SAY
NO.
RAISE YOUR HAND.
THE CONCERNS AGENDA IS
APPROVED.
NEXT UP IS PUBLIC COMMENT.
THIS IS AN OPPORTUNITY FOR
PERSONS TO SPEAK FOR UP TO
THREE MINUTES AGAIN PLEASE CALL
TO ZERO SIX THREE THREE SEVEN
NINE SEVEN TWO THREE AND AT
YOUR MEETING I'D NINE THREE
FOUR SIX THREE EIGHT FIVE TWO
NINE ZERO SEVEN OR CONNECT WE
ASSUME IS DESCRIBED ON THE
AGENDA CITY STAFF WITH CALLERS
THAT HAVE RAISED A HAND ONE BY
ONE USING THE LAST THREE DIGITS
OF YOUR PHONE NUMBER OR THE
PERSONS BE IN ORDER TO
ELECTRONICALLY RAISE YOUR HAND
TO INDICATE YOUR DESIRE TO
SPEAK PLEASE PRESS STAR LINE ON
YOUR PHONE OR SELECT THE RAISED
BUTTON.
DO YOU HEAR AN AUTOMATED
ANNOUNCEMENT THAT THE HOST IS
ALLOWING YOU TO SPEAK WHEN
SPEAKING?
PLEASE MOVE TO A QUIET AREA AND
MUTE ANY BACKGROUND SILENCE
CHRIS.
>> DO WE HAVE ANY MEMBERS
OF THE PUBLIC WHO WISH TO
SPEAK?
YES I DO SEE ADAM KABBAGE YOU
WILL BE PROMOTED AND I WILL BE
GIVING YOU A THIRTY SECOND HEAD
START WHEN YOUR TIME IS UP THE
FLOOR IS YOURS.
>> HI THIS IS ADAM MISCAVIGE
FROM THE FOURTH WARD.
I JUST WANTED TO ASK ABOUT I
WAS LOOKING THROUGH THE SAFE
STREETS FOR OUR PRESENTATION.
I NOTICED IT'S TALKING ABOUT
BIKE LANES ON S MAIN AND IT'S
GOT A FEW DIFFERENT SECTIONS
HERE TO THE STADIUM AND
SILJANDER FOUND ONLY WILLIAM TO
CHURCH NORTHBOUND ONLY ANN
ARBOR SALEEN TO FIELD KRESSE
NORTHBOUND ONLY I GUESS I WAS
JUST A BIT CONFUSED BY THAT.
FIRST OF ALL, I THINK STADIUM
TO CYO CHURCH AND WILLIAM TO S
CHURCH THERE'S SOME OVERLAP
BETWEEN THOSE AND I GUESS MY
MAIN QUESTION WAS WHAT'S UP
WITH THE NORTHBOUND ONLY NORTH
OF STADIUM?
IT DOESN'T MAKE A WHOLE LOT
OF SENSE TO ME.
SO I'M JUST I'M HOPING THAT
THAT CAN BE COVERED WHEN THAT
PRESENTATION HAPPENS.
>> THANK YOU.
THANK YOU.
WHO ELSE CHRIS I SEE LAUREN
DURANT YOU THE FLOOR IS NOW
YOURS
.
THANKS.
CAN EVERYBODY HEAR ME OK?
YES GREAT.
WELL TRANSPORTATION COMMISSION
I'M HERE TONIGHT JUST TO
COMMENT ABOUT SOMETHING THAT
HAPPENED TO ME ON PACARD STREET
LAST WEEK.
I WAS RIDING MY BIKE LAST
TUESDAY MORNING ALONG PACARD
JUST SOUTH OF STADIUM AND A
DRIVER IN AN SUV COLLIDED INTO
BOTH OF US CALLED NINE ONE ONE
THE POLICE INTERVIEWED EACH
OF US AND MADE A CRASH REPORT.
>> PARAMEDICS TRANSPORTED ME TO
M HOSPITAL WHERE THEY CONFIRMED
I HAD BROKEN TWO RIBS IN THE
INCIDENT.
>> SO I'M NOW IN AN UNENVIABLE
POSITION OF RECOVERING FROM MY
INJURIES, REPAIRING OR ACTUALLY
REPLACING MY PRIMARY MEANS
OF TRANSPORTATION SINCE MY BIKE
WAS TOTALED AND I'M NAVIGATING
INSURANCE CLAIMS PROCESSES AS A
FOUR SEASON BIKE RIDER FOR OVER
A DECADE, I KNOW I'M LUCKY THAT
THE INJURIES SUSTAINED IN THIS
CRASH WEREN'T MORE SEVERE AND
AS A DAD YOU MIGHT BE HEARING
MY TODDLER IN THE BACKGROUND AS
A DAD WHO REGULARLY BIKES HIS
THREE YEAR OLD DAUGHTER TO DAY
CARE ALONG PACARD, I'M BEYOND
THANKFUL THAT MY CHILD WASN'T
AT FAULT.
>> BUT AS A FIVE YEAR RESIDENT
OF ANN ARBOR, I'M EXTREMELY
FRUSTRATED BY THE CITY'S
PLODDING PACE TO MAKE WALKING
AND BIKING AROUND TOWN SAFER
DESPITE ITS STATED GOALS TO DO
SO I WASN'T THE ONLY VULNERABLE
ROAD USER I LATER LEARNED TO
GET HIT TO GET HURT ON PACARD
LAST WEEK CITY COUNCIL MUST
PRIORITIZE SAFER STREETS FOR
EVERYBODY AND I KNOW I
APPRECIATE THE MEMBERS OF THIS
COMMISSION'S WORK TO MAKE TO
MOVE ANN ARBOR FORWARD ON THIS.
>> YOU KNOW I'M NOT AN ENGINEER
BUT I THINK PACKARDS WIDE
VEHICLE LANES SHOULD BE
NARROWED TO ENCOURAGE LOWER
VEHICLE SPEEDS AND IT'S PAINTED
BIKE LANES PROTECTED WITH
BOLLARDS OR CONCRETE TO MAKE
BIKE RIDING ON IT FEEL FEASIBLE
AND SENSIBLE INSTEAD OF HIGH
RISK.
I KNOW I'M IN A VERY SELECT
POPULATION THAT CAN HANDLE HIGH
RISK AND ACCEPT IT.
WHEN I TALKED TO MY COLLEAGUES
OVER THIS PAST WEEK MANY
OF THEM JUST JUST SHOOK THEIR
HEADS AND SAID OF COURSE I
WOULD NEVER RIDE MY BIKE IN AN
HOUR.
THE STATUS QUO ON OUR CITY
STREETS IS UNSUSTAINABLE.
THANKS FOR LISTENING AND THANKS
FOR YOUR SERVICE TO MOVE ANN
ARBOR FORWARD.
THANK YOU LORD.
WE HAVE ANYONE ELSE CHRIS
YOUR
YOUR MUTED I SEE MOLLY CLIMBING
THE FLOOR IS NOW YOURS.
I'LL GIVE A 30 SECOND HEAD
START BEFORE YOUR TIME IS UP.
>> THANKS CHRIS.
HI EVERYONE.
IT'S GOOD TO SEE ALL OF YOU
COMMISSIONERS AGAIN.
AND FOR THOSE OF YOU WHO ARE
NEW, I'M MOLLY KLEINMAN.
I SERVED ON TRANSPORTATION
MISSION FOR SIX YEARS, THREE
OF THEM AS THE CHAIR AND I LIKE
LAURA AND I'M CALLING ABOUT
PACKARD AND THE FACT THAT TWO
DRIVERS SERIOUSLY INJURED, TWO
VULNERABLE ROAD USERS IN A
SINGLE WEEK ON PACKARD AND AS
COMMISSIONER HOKE POINTED OUT
TO ME, THERE HAVE ACTUALLY BEEN
MANY MORE VULNERABLE ROAD USER
CRASHES SPECIFICALLY ON PACKARD
JUST IN THE LAST COUPLE
OF MONTHS.
PACKARD IS ONE OF THE MAIN
ROUTES TO YPSILANTI.
PACKARD IS ONE OF THE MOST
POPULAR BIKE ROUTES AND ONE
OF THE MOST POPULAR BUS ROUTES
IN THE CITY AND I HAVE BEEN
JUST SO FRUSTRATED BY THE PACE
THE CRAWLING PACE OF MOSTLY NO
CHANGE HONESTLY ALONG PACARD
WHICH WE KNOW IS A EXTREMELY
POPULAR ROUTE AND ONE THAT
LEADS TO SOME THAN OUR POORER
NEIGHBORHOODS.
SOME OF IT HARBORS MORE DIVERSE
NEIGHBORHOODS AND LEADS AGAIN
TO OUR POORER AND MORE DIVERSE
NEIGHBOR YPSILANTI.
AND I KNOW THAT LOTS AND LOTS
OF WORK HAS GONE INTO THE
TRANSPORTATION PLAN HAS GONE
INTO PRIORITIZING AND DECIDING
WHICH ROADS SHOULD GET WHAT
WHEN.
BUT IN THEORY WE'RE DOING QUICK
BUILDS NOW AND WE COULD BE
QUICKLY MAKING CHANGES.
WE COULD HAVE ALREADY QUICKLY
MADE CHANGES ON PACARD THAT
COULD HAVE PREVENTED ONE OR
BOTH OF THESE CRASHES.
AND SO I'M CALLING TO SPEAK FOR
PACARD AND ESPECIALLY PACKARDS
SOUTH OF STADIUM.
THE WHY FLAT OPEN STRETCH WHERE
IT IS VERY EASY FOR DRIVERS TO
SPEED WHETHER OR NOT THEY
INTEND TO AND WHERE IT REALLY
DOESN'T FEEL SAFE OR ALL AGES
ACCESSIBLE TO RIDE A BIKE OR
EVEN SOMETIMES WALK.
AND SO I HOPE THAT AS YOU'RE
THINKING ABOUT AND I KNOW THAT
MOSTLY THE COMMISSION YOU DON'T
HAVE THIS POWER I KNOW MOSTLY
YOU ARE RESPONDING TO THINGS
THAT THE CITY STAFF BRING TO
YOU BUT YOU DO HAVE THE POWER
OF A MICROPHONE AND I HOPE THAT
YOU WILL BE FOR PACKARD AND THE
MANY RESIDENTS WHO RELY ON
THANKS.
THANKS MOLLET
WITH THAT I DON'T
SEE ANY OTHER HAND RAISED.
I THINK WE ARE GOOD TO MOVE
FORWARD.
THANK YOU ALL FOR YOUR COMMENTS
.
THANKS TO EVERYONE WHO SPOKE
TODAY THEY ARE COMMENTS ARE
VERY VALUABLE TO US AS ALWAYS.
NOBODY KNOWS WHEN THE PACKET
THIS MONTH.
NEXT UP, GETTING INTO THE
BUSINESS FIRST IS THE TWENTY
TWENTY FIVE TRANSPORTATION
COMMISSION WORK PLAN.
SO NORMALLY AROUND THE END
OF THE YEAR WE DEVELOP A
TENTATIVE LIST OF TOPICS THAT
WE HOPE TO COVER THROUGHOUT THE
COURSE OF THE NEXT OR SO STAFF
IS UPDATED THAT WORK PLAN BASED
ON SUGGESTIONS RECEIVED FROM
COMMISSIONERS IN COORDINATION
PARTNER AGENCIES.
SO WE'RE LOOKING FOR ACTION ON
THIS ITEM TONIGHT WE'LL TAKE A
VOTE TO APPROVE THIS LIST AFTER
WE'VE GONE THROUGH IT AND
SOLICITED ANY OTHER IDEAS FROM
YOU ALL THIS IS GOOD.
THIS IS NOT INTENDED TO BE AN
EXHAUSTIVE OR EXCLUSIVE LIST AS
OTHER TOPICS COME UP WE'LL
OBVIOUSLY ADD THEM TO THE
MEETINGS THROUGHOUT THE YEAR
BUT THIS IS AT LEAST A GOOD
START FOR TWENTY TWENTY FIVE
FOR OUR WORK PLAN.
SO TAKE IT AWAY.
ALL RIGHT.
THANK YOU FOR SHARING THE
SCREEN WITH THE THE DRAFT LIST
OF TOPICS ON IT.
LIKE THE CHAIR MENTIONED, THESE
ARE MORE OF A REMINDER LIST AND
THE THE ROUGHLY EXPECTED TIME
FRAME EARLIER IN THE YEAR OR
LATER IN THE YEAR THAT WE WANT
TO BRING THESE TOPICS IN.
THEY'RE NOT REALLY LOCKED INTO
ANY PARTICULAR SEQUENCE OR A
MONTH YET.
SO STARTING FROM THE THE TOP
WHERE TODAY WE'RE GOING TO HAVE
A DRAFT REVIEW OF THE DRAFT
COMMISSION ANNUAL REPORT FROM
THIS CALENDAR YEAR AND THEN
WE'RE LOOKING TO FINALIZE AND
ACCEPT IN THE JANUARY MEETING
AND ALSO RUN THE CHAIRMAN AND
VICE CHAIR ELECTION ALSO THAT'S
FOR THE JANUARY TWENTY FIVE
MEETING.
THE THIRD TOPIC WE'RE GOING TO
BRING IS THE NEXT FISCAL YEAR
POLICY AGENDA INPUT SO WORD
OVER RUNNING BEHIND ON THAT
BECAUSE CITY ADMINISTRATION IS
ALREADY ASKING FOR INPUT ON THE
SAME TOPIC.
SO WILL I GUYS COMMUNICATE THIS
ONE THROUGH EMAILS FOR FOR THIS
ROUND AND COMING AROUND THE
WINTER TIME OF NEXT YEAR WE'LL
MOVE THIS ITEM TO BE SOONER IN
A YEAR OR SO WE LINE UP WITH
THE THE CITY OVERALL POLICY
AGENDA INPUT ALSO FOR
INFORMATION SHARING OR SCHEDULE
WITH POLICE DEPARTMENT TO
PROVIDE UPDATE ON THEIR
CORRIDOR TRAFFIC SAFETY.
MOVING ON TO TALK ABOUT THE
NEXT GROUP STAFF HAS BEEN
WORKING ON THE CAPITAL PRODAN
UPDATES AND THAT INCLUDES THE
TWENTY TWENTY FIVE RESURFACING
AND READY PROJECTS.
SO THESE COULD INCLUDE SIDEWALK
THAT FAIL AND OTHER THINGS SO
WE ALREADY HAVE SOME ITEMS FOR
THAT OFF THE LIST AND WE'RE
GOING TO BRING THAT TO THE
COMMISSION IN THE EARLIER
PORTION OF OF THE YEAR TRAFFIC
CALMING AND SPEED MANAGEMENT
PROGRAM THAT HAS BEEN ON UPDATE
STAFF HAS BEEN WORKING ON AND
WE'RE LOOKING TO SCHEDULE A
MEETING AS THE SUBCOMMITTEE ON
THAT TOPIC WHICH WE'RE BRINGING
A DRAFT THAT'S GOING TO UNIFY
TRAFFIC CALMING PROGRAM THAT'S
ALREADY IN PLACE AND ADDING IN
SPEED MANAGEMENT PROCESS AND
ALSO SCHOOL TRAFFIC CALMING
TOOLKIT AND A BUNCH OF OTHER
UPDATES.
SO THE GOAL IS TRYING TO
PROVIDE LIKE ONE DOCUMENT TO
UNIFY TOPICS IN THIS AREA SO
THAT FOR RESIDENTS THERE'S ONE
PLACE TO GO TO GET INFORMATION
AND ALSO
HELP STAFF TO
UNDERSTAND WHAT PROGRAM, WHAT
RESOURCES ARE AVAILABLE SO WE
CAN NAVIGATE AND ACHIEVE THE
THE MOST I GUESS THE EFFICIENT
WAY TO DEPLOY THESE MEASURES.
QUIET ZONE THAT'S FOR RAILROAD.
THERE IS AN UPDATE ON THAT AND
WE'RE TRYING TO BRING TO THE
COMMISSION IN THE EARLIER PART
OF THE YEAR AT THIS TIME WE'RE
SCHEDULING THE STUDY TEAM WITH
THE UNIVERSITY FEDERAL RAILROAD
DEMONSTRATION AND TO LOOK AT AT
GRADE CROSSINGS THERE IS A
FIELD MEETING STAFF IS GOING TO
ESCADRILLE WITH THE STAKEHOLDER
AND AND THE RAILROAD THAT'S
GOING TO HAPPEN IN THE MIDDLE
OF JANUARY.
SO EARLIER IN THE YEAR WE
SHOULD BE ABLE TO PRESENT SOME
RECOMMENDATIONS FROM THAT
EFFORT.
SAFE STREET FOR ALL PROJECT
TODAY WE'LL HAVE I'D RATHER BE
BACK QUICKER UPDATE AND THERE
WILL BE A MORE DETAILED ONE TO
BE PRESENTED BY THE CONSULTANT
IN COMBINATION WITH STAFF THAT
IS THERE A SLIGHT UPDATE ADD
THAT ONE IS GOING TO BE IN THE
IN THE FEBRUARY MEETING ON
WINTER MAINTENANCE HOPEFULLY BY
MARCH OR APRIL.
WHAT TIME FRAME WILL HAVE SOME
LESSONS LEARNED, SOME
EXPERIENCE FROM THIS SEASON AND
THEN WE'LL TALK ABOUT AT NEXEN
CORRIDOR THAT'S THE SERIES
OF AROUND ABOUT IN COMBINATION
WITH A COUPLE OF SCHOOL
PROPERTIES AND THAT PROJECT
WILL COME TO THE COMMISSION
ALSO EARLIER IN THE YEAR
STEPPING INTO A TIME FRAME
WE'LL TALK ABOUT FISCAL YEAR
2016 BUDGET AND ALSO GET
UPDATES FROM THE DOWNTOWN GET
DOWNTOWN PROGRAM AS WELL AS
EDA'S PROJECT OUTLOOK FOR FOR
THIS YEAR AND NEXT A NUMBER
OF PUBLIC SCHOOL UPDATES OUR
MEMBERS HAVE REQUESTED A COUPLE
OF TIMES TO GET UPDATES ON THAT
.
SO THE CURRENT PLAN IS TO HAVE
A CITY STAFF MEMBER TO MAKE A
PRESENTATION ON THE
COLLABORATION WITH OUR PUBLIC
SCHOOLS AND THAT UPDATE WILL
LIKELY BE IN EITHER JANUARY OR
FEBRUARY.
IT'S GOING TO BE EARLIER THAN
CURRENTLY SHOWN ON THIS LIST BY
THAT TIME AROUND MAY.
WE'RE ALSO LOOKING TO GIVE AN
UPDATE MILLER AVENUE PROJECT
WHICH SHOULD HAVE ALREADY HAVE
SEVERAL MONTHS INTO THE
CONSTRUCTION BY THAT TIME AND
ALSO MADISON TRANSIT CENTER FOR
THOSE MEMBERS THAT HAVE NOT
HEARD ABOUT THIS, THIS IS A
UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
INITIATED PROJECT THAT IS IN
THE MADISON THE PACARD AREA.
THERE IS A LITTLE TRIANGLE
SHAPED THE LAND AND THAT THAT
OWASSO IS BEING INVESTIGATED
FOR A FUTURE TRANSIT CENTER TO
SERVE AS THE TRANSPORTATION
NEEDS TO PRIMARILY STUDENTS
THAT WILL BE HOUSED UNDER THE
IN THE UNIVERSITY DORM
BUILDINGS THAT IS UNDER
CONSTRUCTION RIGHT NOW INTO A
JUNE TIMEFRAME WILL BE LOOKING
AT THE COMMISSION'S FINANCIAL
REVIEW AND ALSO WILL PROVIDE A
MORE DETAILED UPDATE ON THE
SAFE STREET FOR ALL PROJECT AND
THIS UPDATE IS GOING TO BE
FOCUSED ON THE NEAR MISS
ANALYTICAL TASK AND ALSO THE
MULTILINE STREET AND
RECONFIGURATION UPDATE AND ON
THIS ONE CURRENTLY THERE IS AN
ACTIVE REQUEST FOR A PROPOSAL
BEING ADVERTISED AND THE THE
DUE DATE FOR PROPOSAL IS IN THE
MIDDLE OF JANUARY 2025 ALSO
ATTEMPT TO BRING SOME UPDATE
ABOUT THE UNIVERSITY'S 2050
CAMPUS PLAN INTO THE SECOND
HALF OF THE CALENDAR YEAR.
WE'LL PROVIDE AN UPDATE ON THE
SIPPY CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT PLAN.
WE MIGHT BE LOOKING AT A
DIFFERENT TIME FRAME ON THAT IF
WE TALK ABOUT THIS TOPIC
EARLIER IN THE YEAR, WE CAN
PROVIDE AN UPDATE TO THE NEXT
YEAR OR TWO YEARS WORTH
OF PROJECTS IF WE DO THIS IN
THE SECOND HALF OF THE YEAR,
WE'LL BE ABLE TO REPORT MORE AS
TO THE STATUS UPDATE TO THE
CURRENT SIPI NORTHMAN STREET
TRANSPORTATION STUDY.
THAT'S ANOTHER PROJECT WE HAVE
AN ACTIVE WE ON MY PARTY THAT
WE ARE WORKING ON.
WE ARE WORKING ON A REQUEST FOR
PROPOSAL AT THIS MOMENT WE
ANTICIPATE TO PUBLISH THAT RFP
IN JANUARY OUR STAFF
DEVELOPMENT PROJECT.
THIS ONE'S A FAIRLY SIZABLE
SIGNIFICANT PROJECT IN THE
STATE AND EISENHOWER AREA CITY
STAFF HAS BEEN WORKING WITH
ADMINISTRATION ON SOME VERY
HIGH LEVEL AREA PLAN, SOME VERY
HIGH LEVEL ESTIMATE OF OF
TRANSPORTATION NEEDS ON SITE
AND OFF SITE AND BEING AEROPLAN
THERE ARE A LOT OF ASSUMPTIONS
INTO THE ESTIMATE AND HOPEFULLY
IN THE MIDDLE OF THE YEAR WE'LL
BE ABLE TO GET MORE MOVEMENT ON
THE PROJECT ON THE DEVELOPMENT
AND PRESENT A MORE DETAILED
UPDATE TO THE COMMISSION ON
THAT STUDY INTO INTO AUGUST.
THAT'S OUR TYPICAL VISION ZERO
PROGRAM ANNUAL UPDATE.
WE'LL LOOK AT THE EFFORT IN THE
PAST YEAR REVIEW CRASH DATA AND
PROVIDE THAT UPDATE TO THE
COMMISSION.
THE STATE AND NORTH UNIVERSITY
PROJECT.
WE SHOULD HAVE SOME MOVEMENT IN
THAT ALSO IN THE SECOND HALF
OF THE YEAR STATE STREET IN THE
BLOG FROM SULPHER UNIVERSITY TO
WILLIAM THAT'S WHERE WE'RE
LOOKING TO PROVIDE IMPROVEMENT
INTO BICYCLE FACILITY AS WELL
AS AN EXCLUSIVE TRANSIT LANE ON
THAT BLOCK AND THAT PROJECT
WILL ALSO EXTEND TO THE NORTH
UNIVERSITY PORTION IN THE NEXT
CALENDAR YEAR.
SO WE'LL BE BRINGING AN UPDATE
ON THAT AND I WILL HAVE DEBBIE
FROM UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
TRANSPORTATION RESEARCH
INSTITUTE TO GIVE US AN UPDATE
AND WE ARE OPEN TO LOOK FOR
ANOTHER UPDATE IN THE SECOND
HALF OF 2025.
THERE ARE MOVING THINGS VERY
QUICKLY AROUND TOWN HERE.
WE WANT TO ALSO PROVIDE ANOTHER
PUBLIC SCHOOL RELATED UPDATE IN
THE SECOND HALF OF THE YEAR
THEN NEAR THE END OF 2025 WE'LL
SQUARE DOWN THE DATES FOR 2096
AND ALSO START WORKING ON THE
WORK PLAN FOR NEXT FISCAL YEAR
FOR THE NEXT CALENDAR YEAR AS
WELL AS SUMMARIZE THE ANNUAL
REPORT AND THE POLICY AGENDA
INPUT SO THAT IS THE CURRENT
PLAN AND IF THERE'S ANY
ADDITIONS OR COMMENTS WE'D BE
HAPPY TO ACCOMMODATE THOSE ANY
COMMENTS OR ESPECIALLY
ADDITIONS TO THE LIST WE'VE GOT
HERE.
>> YEAH, MATT THANKS.
I'D LIKE TO JUST MAKE A NOTE
THEN MAYBE SOMETIME IN THE NEXT
YEAR THE RIDE WOULD LIKE TO
BRING FORWARD A DISCUSSION
ABOUT DEDICATED BUS LINES.
I DON'T HAVE A SPECIFIC DATE
FOR YOU NOW SO IF WE COULD JUST
PENCIL IT IN AS A FLOATER
PROBABLY BE IN THE SECOND HALF.
I LOOK FORWARD.
I'LL LET YOU GUYS KNOW AS SOON
AS AS I CAN.
WE HAVE SOMETHING TO PRESENT.
THANK YOU.
EIGHT
WE MAY HAVE LOST P OR AT
LEAST YOU WERE THERE YOU ARE.
>> CAN YOU HEAR ME?
YES.
SORRY SORRY FOR THE AUDIO
DIFFICULTY.
I DO HAVE A COUPLE OF THINGS
I'D LIKE TO TO ADD.
ONE OF THEM IS THAT I THINK
THIS THE CONTRACT WITH SPIN WAS
APPROVED FOR ONE YEAR OF HOW I
UNDERSTOOD IT FROM THE COUNCIL
MEETING AND I GUESS I WOULD
LIKE TO CHECK ON THEIR PROGRESS
BEFORE WE APPROVE THEM FOR
ANOTHER YEAR SO THAT SHOULD BE
SOMETIME IN THE SPRING THAT WE
WOULD WANT TO DISCUSS THAT
AGAIN.
>> A GOOD CATCH.
I'D ALSO LIKE TO DISCUSS OUR
PROGRESS ON LANE
RECONFIGURATIONS PURSUANT TO
THE OR DID SOMETHING MORE
DETAILED I THINK AT THE JUNE
MEETING.
I MEAN IT CAN MOVE AROUND BUT I
THINK WE HAD WATER MAIN STREET
OR CONFIGURATION I'M TELLING
YOU RIGHT.
>> I'M SORRY I MISSED THAT.
>> THANK YOU.
AND IF WE CAN MOVE ON WE
CERTAINLY WOULD I THINK THE YOU
KNOW THIS TIME THAT WE ARE
GOING AT ALL SO WE WILL ONE
OTHER I JUST WANT TO THANK THE
APEX TOPIC THAT'S SCHEDULED FOR
MAY IS THIS SPECIFICALLY ABOUT
THE I IN TRANSPORTATION AT
THEIR SCHOOLS AND THE UPGRADES
THAT THEY'RE DOING TO THEIR
BUILDINGS?
>> IF SO, THAT SEEMS LIKE IT
NEEDS TO BE MUCH EARLIER IN THE
YEAR.
THEY ARE MOVING AHEAD WITH WITH
DESIGNS AND I I DON'T WANT TO
FIND OURSELVES COMING IN TO
JUST SEE WHAT
THE DESIGNS ARE
GOING TO BE.
I'D LIKE FOR THEM TO HEAR THE
COMMUNITY INPUT BEFORE THE
DESIGNS ARE FINALIZED.
>> THAT MEANS IT NEEDS TO BE
DONE EARLIER.
LET'S TRY AND PRIORITIZE THAT.
YEAH, I THINK THAT PUBLIC
CERTAINLY SOMETHING ALONG THE
TOPICS THAT WE WOULD LIKE TO
INCLUDE IN THIS IN THIS MEETING
OF YOU KNOW WE DO OBVIOUSLY
HAVE ANY VALUE.
WE DON'T HAVE A VICE PRESIDENT
SO I KNOW THAT CHRIS AND LUKE
YOU KNOW, HAVE BEEN AND WILL BE
TRYING TO ARRANGE FOR THAT.
SO AGAIN, YOU KNOW, WE PUT IT
IN MAY BUT I THINK THERE'S A
HOPE THAT WE CAN MAYBE GET
SOMETHING LINED UP EARLIER.
I DON'T KNOW IF YOU HAVE ANY
UPDATES ON THERE.
SO FAR WE DO NOT GET ANY
CONFIRMATION FROM THE SCHOOLS
TO DO I GUESS COMMIT TO TO
COMMENT AT PRESENT.
SO WE ARE LOOKING FOR CYRUS
NATHI.
HE'S A PREVIOUS COMMISSION
MEMBER AND IS THE STAFF NOW
CYRUS HAS BEEN WORKING A LOT
WITH SCHOOLS SAFETY REVIEWS AND
CAPITAL PROTESTS RELATED STUFF
WASTE FROM THE CITY SIDE SO
CYRUS IS PLANNING TO COME TO
THE COMMISSION TO MAKE A
PRESENTATION EARLIER IN THE
YEAR.
SO I THINK IT'S EITHER JAN OR
FEBRUARY AND THEN MAYBE WE CAN
ARRANGE THAT FOR HIM TO ACCEPT
ME BACK AND GET BACK THOSE
CONTACTS WITH AP.
YES, YEAH.
I THINK WE SHOULD PLAN ON THAT.
>> I JUST WANT TO MAKE SURE I'M
CLEAR ON WHAT YOU SAID, LUKE
AAPS HAS NOT COMMITTED TO
ATTENDING ANY MEETING OR GIVING
ANY PRESENTATION.
THAT'S RIGHT.
OK, ALL RIGHT.
WELL IT'S I MEAN DISAPPOINTED
I'M DISAPPOINTED BUT NOT
SURPRISED AND WHAT MAKES US
THINK THAT THEY ARE GOING TO
COME EVENTUALLY IN MAY OR ANY
TIME DO WE HAVE SOME REASON TO
THINK THEY MIGHT AGREE TO IT
EVENTUALLY?
>> NO.
THESE THESE ITEMS ORDER JOTTED
DOWN HERE BECAUSE WE HAVE HEARD
SEVERAL REQUESTS.
REPACHOLI SO WE WE ABSOLUTELY
WANT TO MAKE IT HAPPEN BUT SO
FAR WE HAVE NOT BEEN ABLE TO
MAKE IT HAPPEN BUT INSTEAD I
THOUGHT THE BEST WAY IS THAT I
LEAST THE FORCE THAT I HAVE TO
MAKE A PRESENTATION ON THE
BACKGROUND INFORMATION LIKE
WHAT HAS HAPPENED IN TERMS
OF REVIEW AND WHAT WE WHAT KIND
OF KNOWLEDGE WE HAVE HAD AT
THIS MOMENT SO THAT THE
COMMISSION CAN ADVISE US IN THE
MEANTIME.
OK, THANKS FOR THAT, LUC.
>> I MEAN I GUESS I WOULD LIKE
TO IF WE CAN'T GIVE THEM
FEEDBACK IN THIS MEETING THEN
MAYBE WE WILL NEED TO FIND A
DIFFERENT WAY TO GIVE THEM THE
COMMUNITY INPUT AND YOU KNOW,
IN THE INPUT FROM THIS TEAM SO
WELL I GUESS I EXPECT TO FEED
INPUT TO CYRUS IN THE NEXT
MONTH OR TWO WHEN HE COMES, YOU
KNOW, PRESENTS TO US AND YOU
KNOW, GIVEN HIS CONTACTS WITH
APES, I WOULD EXPECT HIM TO
FEED THAT BACK TO THEM BUT
RIGHT.
IT WOULD BE MUCH BETTER TO HAVE
A DIRECT, YOU KNOW,
COMMUNICATION WITH THEM IN THIS
FORUM.
BUT I KNOW WE'RE WORKING ON
THAT.
SO IN THE MEANTIME, IN THE NEXT
MONTH OR TWO OR AT LEAST HAVE
CYRUS AND HE COMMUNICATES WITH
FREQUENTLY AS I UNDERSTAND IT,
ANYONE ELSE
.
ALL RIGHT.
SO LUKE, DO WE NEED TO ADD THE
SUGGESTED YOU KNOW, THE THINGS
WE'VE BEEN TALKING ABOUT HERE
BEFORE WE CAN VOTE OR CAN WE
VOTE WITH THE UNDERSTANDING
THAT LUKE WILL ADD THOSE TOPICS
TO THE WORKPLACE?
WOULD YOU BE COMFORTABLE VOTING
WITH THE UNDERSTANDING LUKE?
YOU THAT THE COUPLE
OF ADDITIONAL THINGS YOU'LL ADD
TO THE LIST?
YES, I'VE TAKEN NOTES AND I
WILL ADD THEM.
ALL RIGHT.
LET'S DO THEM.
OH, SO THIS IS IN THE BUSINESS
SECTION SO WE SHOULD VOTE ON
IT, RIGHT?
>> YES.
CORRECT.
>> OK, ALL RIGHT.
SO IF THERE ARE NO OTHER
COMMENTS AND BY THE WAY,
OF COURSE, YOU KNOW, AS I
MENTIONED AT THE END OF EVERY
MEETING ANY AGENDA TOPICS
PLEASE EMAIL OR TALK TO US IN
ANY FORMAT OR FORUM THAT YOU
WANT.
AND YOU KNOW, THIS IS NOT THE
ONLY TIME TO GET TOPICS ONTO
THE AGENDA FOR NEXT YEAR.
RIGHT.
SO CAN I HAVE A MOTION TO TO
APPROVE THE TWENTY TWENTY FIVE
TRANSPORTATION COMMISSION WORK
PLAN AS SHOWN WITH AMENDMENTS
THAT WE'VE TALKED ABOUT?
I'M SECONDED BY ERIC ERIC AND
GIVE ALL THOSE IN FAVOR PLEASE
SAY YES OR RAISE YOUR EARNED
YES.
ALL THOSE OPPOSED PLEASE SAY NO
OR RAISE YOUR HAND.
THE WORKPLACE AS AMENDED OR AS
WILL BE AMENDED IT HAS BEEN
APPROVED.
>> THANK YOU.
ALL RIGHT.
MIXED UP WE HAVE THE
TRANSPORTATION COMMISSION
MEETING SCHEDULE FOR TWENTY
TWENTY FIVE.
SO CHRIS, IF YOU WANTED TO GO
OVER THE PROPOSED MEETING DATES
.
YES.
NOT A POEM.
CAN EVERYONE SEE MY SCREEN?
OK, SO FOR TWENTY TWENTY FIVE
THE TRANSPORTATION COMMISSION
WILL CONTINUE TO MEET ON NINE
WE ASSUME NONE OF THE MEETING
REQUIREMENTS WILL BE CHANGING.
IT WILL STILL BE THE SAME EXACT
LINK IT HAS BEEN DONE.
IT'S JUST BEEN EXTENDED TO
IMPROVE SOME OF THAT EFFICIENCY
NOW I WENT AHEAD AND CROSS
REFERENCE THE THIRD WEDNESDAY
OF EVERY MONTH WITH ANY MAJOR
HOLIDAYS I AND I COULDN'T FIND
ANY ANY THAT WOULD BE A
CONFLICT OF INTEREST AT THIS
TIME.
THIS IS WHAT OUR SCHEDULE FOR
TWENTY TWENTY FIVE WILL LOOK
LIKE JANUARY 15TH, FEBRUARY
19TH, MARCH 19TH, APRIL 16, MAY
21ST.
JUNE 18TH, JULY 16TH.
AUGUST 20TH.
SEPTEMBER 17, OCTOBER 14,
NOVEMBER 19TH AND LASTLY
DECEMBER 17.
WITH THAT SAID, I ALSO LIKE TO
TAKE THIS OPPORTUNITY TO ALSO
ENCOURAGE PARTICIPANTS AND
MEMBERS OF THE PUBLIC AND LET
THEM KNOW THAT ACCOMMODATION'S
INCLUDING SIGN LANGUAGE CAN BE
ASKED BY REACHING OUT TO THE
OFFICE BY CALLING THE NUMBER
SEVEN THREE FOUR SEVEN NINE
FOUR SIX ONE FOUR ZERO OR
REACHING OUT TO THEM VIA EMAIL
AT CITY CLERK CITY I THAT ORG
NOW WITH THAT SAID I WILL OPEN
THE FLOOR TO ANY CONVERSATIONS
TO SEE IF THERE'S ANY CONFLICT
OF INTEREST OR IF THERE'S ANY
DATE.
THIS IS MOVING FORWARD WITH THE
ASSUMPTION THAT THE
TRANSPORTATION COMMISSION WILL
CONTINUE TO WANT TO MEET
ONLINE.
WE ASSUME THAT IS NOT THE CASE.
THIS WILL BE THE TIME TO HAVE
THAT CONVERSATION.
>> ANY COMMENTS ON EITHER
OF THOSE TOPICS EITHER THE THE
INDIVIDUAL MEETING DATES OR THE
THE TOPIC MEETING ON ZUMAR IN
PERSON
?
I GUESS I'D LIKE TO PROPOSE
THAT WE MOVE THE DECEMBER
MEETING TO DECEMBER 10 TO A
LITTLE FURTHER AWAY FROM THE
BREAKTIME TIME THAT MOST PEOPLE
TAKE AT THE END OF DECEMBER
THEN BUT I KNOW THAT THIRD
WEDNESDAY IS SOMETHING THAT
ALLOWS US TO NOT LIKE TO WITH
OTHER BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
FOR THE SAKE AND AND THEN
COMMISSION OR COUNCIL MEMBERS
THAT REQUIRE MORE INVESTIGATION
LOOK AS TO WHETHER ABOUT SO I
CAN CHIME IN ON THAT IT WOULD
REQUIRE TO MY KNOWLEDGE THE
ONLY AVAILABLE SLOT THAT IS THE
CENTER OF CITY AT THE CENTER
OF TIME WHICH WAS THE FIRST
THURSDAY OF EVERY MONTH.
SO I NEED TO KIND OF HAVE TO
FALL TO MY FIRST CITY COUNCIL
AND ALL THEIR COMMISSIONS AND
TO ALREADY HAVE TIME SELECTED
SO I CAN DEFINITELY GET BACK TO
THE COMMISSION ABOUT CHANGING
THE DECEMBER DATE.
BUT AT THIS TIME OUT OF THE TOP
OF MY HEAD WE WANTED TO CHANGE
THE DECEMBER WOULD HAVE TO BE
UH WE WOULD HAVE TO BE LOOKING
AT THAT UH FIRST THURSDAY
OF THE MONTH.
WELL, I WOULD BE OK BRINGING
THIS BACK HAVE
YOU COULD COME
BACK IN JANUARY AND SAY WAIT
WHAT YOU BEING THERE?
>> LET US KNOW WHAT YOUR
INVESTIGATION DATE SAYS AND I
THINK THERE IS A PATH TO
IDENTIFYING THAT YOU WILL NO
DOUBT IT TO ME ON THE SCREEN
AND IF NOT WE COULD TAKE
LOOKING AT OTHER OPTIONS AND
BRING IT BACK IN JANUARY.
OK, WITH YOU AND YEAH LIKE
YOU'RE TALKING AT SOME TIME
YOU'RE NOT TALKING IT'S LIKE
THIS.
>> AND ANY OTHER COMMENTS ABOUT
THE MEETING DATES OR ZUMAN
VERSUS IN PERSON IF ANYONE HAD
ANY THOUGHTS PETE YOUR HANDS
STILL RAISED.
DO YOU HAVE ANY OTHER THOUGHTS
?
>> I YOU KNOW I WAS GOING TO
MAYBE MENTION IT TO THE
COMMISSIONER COMMUNICATIONS AT
I THINK IT'S A FINE TIME NOW TO
JUST THROW THAT LIKE CHRIS
SAID, IF THERE'S A DESIRE TO DO
ANY IN-PERSON MEETING OR
MEETINGS, YOU KNOW, I AS I
UNDERSTAND IT, I THINK THERE
ARE A HANDFUL OF BOARDS OR
COMMISSIONS THAT ARE MEETING IN
PERSON.
MOST ARE NOT.
BUT YOU KNOW, IF IF THERE'S
STRONG FEELINGS EITHER WAY THEN
YOU KNOW, PLEASE LET US KNOW IF
WE CAN WE CAN TALK ABOUT IT
WHETHER IT'S PERIODIC OR A ONE
OFF OR OR WHATEVER.
>> YEAH, I WAS JUST GOING TO
SAY I THINK IN GENERAL THE XOOM
IS REALLY HELPFUL WITH
CHILDCARE ISSUES AND EVERYTHING
ELSE BUT AT LEAST LIKE ONE
IN-PERSON MEETING.
BUT YEAR MIGHT BE NICE MOST
OF YOU I'VE NEVER MET IN PERSON
SO I WOULD WELCOME THAT
OPPORTUNITY OR AND I THINK WITH
THE OPEN MEETINGS ACT IT
PROBABLY NEEDS TO BE A MEETING
FOR US ALL TO MEET IN PERSON.
SO I WOULD I WOULD APPRECIATE
THAT OPPORTUNITY BUT I AGREE
THAT AT LEAST FOR ME GENERALLY
SPEAKING ZOOME IS PREFERRED OR
ERIC YEAH I'LL JUST ECHO WHAT
KATE SAID.
I LIKE DEFINITELY MAKE ONE
IN-PERSON MEETING IF IT WAS
PLANNED WELL IN ADVANCE BUT
OTHERWISE CHILD CARE
PARTICULARLY MOST OF THEM NEED
TO BE ON SET FOR ME.
>> THANK YOU.
YEAH I THINK I'M IN THE SAME
BOAT.
YOU KNOW I WOULD LIKE TO MEET A
LOT OF PEOPLE I DON'T KNOW I
WOULD WANT TO MOVE IT IN PERSON
FOR EVERY MEETING BY THE
STRETCH PERSONALLY BUT I ALSO
WOULD BE OPPOSED TO MAYBE
HAVING A MEETING HERE OR THERE
BE IN PERSON LIKE SAID IF IT'S
PLANNED WELL IN ADVANCE.
YOU KNOW, MAYBE A SUMMER
MEETING OR SOMETHING WHEN IT'S
WEATHER'S NICER IT'S LIGHT OUT
LATER AND YOU KNOW, MAYBE WE
CAN THINK ABOUT THAT FOR ONE
OF OUR LATE SPRING OR SUMMER
MEETINGS THAT THERE'S AN
APPETITE AND IF ANYONE HAS ANY
THOUGHTS TO, YOU KNOW, DON'T
WANT TO SHARE THEM NOW ARE THEY
THINK OF SOMETHING JUST EMAIL
US AT ANY TIME IF YOU'RE LIKE
NO THAT JUST WON'T WORK FOR ME
THEN PLEASE LET IT BE KNOWN.
BUT YOU KNOW, LOOK, WE CAN TALK
OFFLINE MAYBE YOU WOULD HAVE TO
BE INVOLVED I ASSUME AND
EVERYTHING SO MAYBE MAYBE IT
JUST WON'T WORK TO DO A LONG
TIME BUT I THINK IT WOULD BE
MAYBE A GOOD GOAL FOR THE YEAR.
ALL RIGHT.
AND YOU'RE THE COMMENTS.
CLAIRE, THE MOTION TO APPROVE
ALL RIGHT.
THE TWENTY TWENTY FIVE
CLAIRE, THE MOTION TO APPROVE
TRANSPORTATION COMMISSION
THE TWENTY TWENTY FIVE
MEETINGS SCHEDULE AS SHOWN AND
TRANSPORTATION COMMISSION
YOU WON'T WANT TO MOVE TO VOTE
MEETINGS SCHEDULE AS SHOWN AND
ON I'LL MOVE BY ERIC SECONDED
YOU WON'T WANT TO MOVE TO VOTE
BY LARRY ALL THOSE IN FAVOR
ON I'LL MOVE BY ERIC SECONDED
PLEASE SAY YES OR RAISE YOUR
BY LARRY ALL THOSE IN FAVOR
HAND GOT ALL THOSE OPPOSED SAY
PLEASE SAY YES OR RAISE YOUR
NO.
HAND GOT ALL THOSE OPPOSED SAY
RAISE YOUR HAND RIGHT.
NO.
THE MEETINGS SCHEDULE IS
RAISE YOUR HAND RIGHT.
APPROVED.
THE MEETINGS SCHEDULE IS
ALL RIGHT.
APPROVED.
NEXT UP INFORMATION AND
ALL RIGHT.
DISCUSSION.
NEXT UP INFORMATION AND
FIRST TOPIC IS THE SAFE STREETS
DISCUSSION.
FOR ALL PROJECT UPDATE.
FIRST TOPIC IS THE SAFE STREETS
THE CITY RECEIVED SAFE STREETS
FOR ALL PROJECT UPDATE.
FOR ALL GRANT TO DEPLOY SPEED
THE CITY RECEIVED SAFE STREETS
MANAGEMENT MEASURES QUICKLY
FOR ALL GRANT TO DEPLOY SPEED
LOAD BICYCLE FACILITIES AND
MANAGEMENT MEASURES QUICKLY
TECHNOLOGY TO SUPPORT THE
LOAD BICYCLE FACILITIES AND
EVALUATION OF ON NEAR MISS
TECHNOLOGY TO SUPPORT THE
EVENTS.
EVALUATION OF ON NEAR MISS
SO SUZANNE FLOWERS IS HERE.
EVENTS.
SHE'LL PROVIDE A QUICK UPDATE
SO SUZANNE FLOWERS IS HERE.
TO THE PROJECT AND A MORE
SHE'LL PROVIDE A QUICK UPDATE
DETAILED UPDATE I THINK IS
TO THE PROJECT AND A MORE
SCHEDULED FOR EARLY NEXT YEAR.
DETAILED UPDATE I THINK IS
THAT IS ALL CORRECT.
SCHEDULED FOR EARLY NEXT YEAR.
SO SUZANNE HAUSER, THANK YOU.
THAT IS ALL CORRECT.
>> ALL RIGHT.
SO SUZANNE HAUSER, THANK YOU.
IN JUST A MOMENT SO I CAN HAVE
>> ALL RIGHT.
A CORRECT FLIGHT DACCA
AND IF I
COULD GET A VERBAL CONFIRMATION
FROM SOMEONE THAT YOU ARE
SEEING MY SLIDES AND IT STARTS
WITH SAFE STREETS FOR ALL
PROJECT UPDATE.
FANTASTIC.
WELL, THANK YOU SO MUCH FOR
HAVING ME THIS EVENING.
LIKE THE TITLE SAYS, I AM GOING
TO PROVIDE A SMALL UPDATE AND
OBVIOUSLY ANSWER SOME QUESTIONS
REGARDING OUR SAFE STREETS FOR
ALL FEDERAL GRANT AGAIN, MY
NAME IS SUZANNE FLOWERS.
I'M THE TRANSPORTATION PROGRAM
MANAGER AND THE SAFE STREETS
PROJECT LEAD.
I AM ALSO WORKING WITH CYRUS
MIKITA AND LUKE LIU IN THE
IMPLEMENTATION OF THIS PROJECT
FOR THE CITY STAFF SITE.
SO AS A LITTLE BACKGROUND WE
DID RECEIVE A THREE POINT EIGHT
MILLION DOLLAR FEDERAL GRANT
OF WHICH NINE HUNDRED AND FIFTY
THOUSAND DOLLARS WE NEED TO
BRING IN THE FORM OF LOCAL
MATCH DOLLARS AND THAT LOCAL
MATCH IS COMING FROM OUR
CLIMATE VILLAGE FUNDS.
THIS IS A CITY WIDE GRANT SO WE
WOULD BE LOOKING AT ANY
LOCATION CITY WIDE AND THE MAIN
ELEMENTS AS WE HAD ALREADY
DISCUSSED OUR QUICK BUILD SPEED
MANAGEMENT AND OUR NEAR MISS
VIDEO ANALYTICS SYSTEM AND OUR
TIME FRAME IS FOR YEARS THAT
WAS FROM THE START AND
EXECUTION OF THE GRANT
AGREEMENT.
WE HAVE ALREADY DONE ONE YEAR'S
WORTH OF WORK.
I'M GOING TO START WITH THE
NEAR MISS VIDEO ANALYTICS
SYSTEM.
I BELIEVE LUKE HAD TALKED A
LITTLE BIT EARLIER ABOUT WHERE
WE ARE IN OUR REQUEST OR
PROPOSALS PROCESS OUR QUESTIONS
ARE ACTUALLY DO THIS WEEK TO BE
POSTED ON THE WEBSITE AND THEN
FULL PROPOSALS ARE DUE BACK TO
THE CITY ON JANUARY THE 7TH AND
WE'RE ANTICIPATE COUNCIL ACTION
THE PROFESSIONAL SERVICES
AGREEMENT IN THE MARCH APRIL
TWENTY TWENTY FIVE TIMEFRAME TO
GIVE YOU A LITTLE BIT MORE OF A
SCOPE OF WORK I HAVE BULLETED
ITEMS ON THE SLIDE BUT I'D LIKE
TO ALSO READ THOSE FOR ANYONE
WHO MAY NOT HAVE THEIR SCREEN
OWNERS DOING SOMETHING ELSE.
SO THE MOST IMPORTANT THING
THAT WE WANT TO USE ARE OUR
EXISTING GRID SMART CAMERAS TO
CAPTURE THESE NEAR MISS EVENTS
AND ACTUAL CRASHES ON OUR
EXISTING INTERSECTIONS AND WE
HAVE APPROXIMATELY SIXTY ONE
SMART CAMERA LOCATIONS ACROSS
THE CITY.
WE'LL USE THIS DATA TO EVALUATE
THE POTENTIAL SAFETY
IMPROVEMENTS AND IDENTIFY
PATTERNS OF INTERSECTION WHERE
A CRASH IS KNOWN.
WE HAVE SOME OF THOSE BEHAVIOR
DETAILS AND ANALYSIS DONE BUT
WE DON'T HAVE THAT CAPABILITY
ON SOMETHING THAT'S ACTUALLY
NOT REPORTED.
WE WILL BE DOING DATA
COLLECTION FOR TWO YEARS AND
WHEN I SAY DATA COLLECTION THIS
WILL BE VIDEO DETECTION.
THE CITY WILL NOT OWN THE VIDEO
.
WE WILL NOT HAVE ACCESS TO THAT
VIDEO.
IT WILL ONLY BE HOUSED OFFSITE
AND BY THE SELECTED VENDOR.
AND SO I JUST REALLY WANT TO
MAKE THAT VERY, VERY CLEAR THAT
WERE MANY QUESTIONS WE HAD FROM
THE RFP ON THAT SO FAR AND I
WOULD LIKE TO THEN SHIFT TO OUR
STATUS OF OUR GRANT WORKING
HERE.
SO WE ARE WORKING WITH A
CONSULTING TEAM, OUR MAIN GRANT
COORDINATOR IS SAM SCHWARTZ.
THIS IS A FAMILIAR FIRM TO
PROBABLY MANY OF YOU.
THEY HELPED WITH THE
DEVELOPMENT OF OUR
TRANSPORTATION MASTER PLAN, OUR
IMPLEMENTING CONTRACT AND THEY
ALSO DID HELP WRITE THE GRANT
FOR OUR SAFE STREETS.
THEY PARTNERED WITH WEI TRIMM
WHICH IS ALSO A VERY FAMILIAR
FIRM DOING PROJECTS ACROSS THE
CITY.
THEY'LL BE WORKING ON THE
CONSTRUCTION DESIGN AND DATA
COLLECTION FOR THE PROJECT AND
THEN THEY ALSO SUBCONTRACT DID
WITH SMITH GROUP TO HELP WITH
PUBLIC ENGAGEMENT.
THE SCOPE OF WORK FOR OUR GRANT
COORDINATOR IS REALLY ALL
OF THE ELEMENT WITH IN THE
QUICK BUILD AND SPEED
MANAGEMENT.
I WILL GET TO THE PROTECTED
BIKE LANES AND HARD AND CENTER
LINES IN A MINUTE BUT WE WILL
BE LOOKING AT ADDING ADDITIONAL
POTENTIAL PROJECT LOCATIONS AND
THE GRANT COORDINATOR WILL
ASSIST AND BEAT THAT ONE ONE
ENTITY THAT IS HELPING WITH THE
PROJECT SELECTION DESIGN
CONSTRUCTION INSPECTION BID
PACKAGE DEVELOPMENT AND AGAIN
DATA COLLECTION.
>> THERE WERE A COUPLE
OF QUESTIONS AND THE PUBLIC
COMMENT PERIOD THAT I WANT TO
ADDRESS NOW BECAUSE I THINK IT
WILL BE VERY HELPFUL WITHIN THE
SLIDE DECK THAT I HAVE
PRESENTED TONIGHT.
WE DID HAVE A FIRM HRC WORKING
ON WHAT WE WERE HOPING TO HAVE
DEPLOYED EARLY PROTECTED BIKE
LANES AND AND CENTER LINES WHEN
WE RECEIVED THE GRANT WE WERE
INFORMED BY OUR FEDERAL HIGHWAY
PARTNERS THAT WE COULD ONLY
SUBMIT ONE NEPA EVALUATION
PROCESS AND SO THAT IS A
CONDITION WITHIN THE GRANT
AGREEMENT THAT WE'RE NOT ABLE
TO DO CONSTRUCTION AND MAKE
CHANGES WITHIN WITHIN THE ROAD
RIGHT OF WAY.
WE CAN ONLY KIND OF ASK AND
HAVE THAT REVIEW DONE ONE TIME
AND SO THAT
DELAYED US FROM
BEING ABLE TO ACTUALLY DEPLOY
SOME OF THESE TREATMENTS EARLY
KNOWING THAT WE ALSO INITIALLY
DEVELOPED THIS LIST OF HARDENED
CENTER LINE LOCATIONS WHICH IS
ON SLIDE SIX AND I'M GOING TO
ROLL TO THE NEXT ONE AND
BUFFORD BIKE LANES IN THE
UNDERSTANDING THAT WE WOULD
ACTUALLY GET TO DO THESE AHEAD
OF SOME OF THE OTHER WORK AND
SO TO ANSWER ONE OF THE
QUESTIONS WHY WE WERE ONLY
DOING SOME OF THE PROTECTED
BIKE LANES BECAUSE WE WEREN'T
GOING TO DO PAVEMENT MARKING
WERE INITIALLY AS PART OF THIS
WE'RE GOING TO CALL KIND
OF BUILD 2.0 PROCESS.
WE'VE HAD TO PIVOT SINCE THE
INFORMATION PROVIDED BY FEDERAL
HIGHWAY.
OUR UNDERSTANDING NOW I CAN SAY
THAT WITH HAVING SAM SCHWARTZ
AND THE OTHER FIRMS WORKING
WITH US WE ARE GOING TO LOOK AT
POTENTIAL PAVEMENT MARKING LANE
CHANGES WHICH WOULD ALLOW US TO
DO MORE PROTECTED BIKE LANES
AND HAVE THOSE NARROW BUFFERS
NEXT TO THOSE BIKE LANES.
SO AGAIN, JUST AS A QUICK
REITERATION WE DIDN'T INITIALLY
HAVE THEM BECAUSE PAVEMENT
MARKING WORK IS NOT QUICK.
IT DOES TAKE A LOT OF TIME AND
WE WERE LOOKING TO GET THESE IN
THE GROUND QUICKLY.
WE PIVOTED BECAUSE WE ARE NOT
ABLE TO DO TWO SEPARATE NEPA
SUBMITTALS AND SO NOW WE HAVE
TO PACKAGE ALL OF OUR AND
CENTER LINE LOCATIONS WITH THE
PROTECTED BIKE LANES WITH THE
ENTIRETY OF THE REST OF OUR
QUICK BUILD AND SPEED
MANAGEMENT LOCATIONS.
SO THE HEART AND CENTER LINE
LOCATIONS AS OF RIGHT NOW THE
WORK THAT WE HAVE BEEN DOING
WITH HRC PRIOR TO THE ACCESS
FOR A GRANT WE WERE GOING TO DO
THE PROTECTED BOLLER WE'RE
GOING TO HAVE I'M SORRY CITY
POSTS AND SOME SPEED HUMPS AT
PAULENE ITSELF MAIN PAULENE AT
SEVEN POLLINATES STADIUM
PLIMOTH HERE ON PARKWAY PLIMOTH
AT NEXEN PLYMOUTH AT TROVA
WOULD LIMIT THAT BERTEN SEVENTH
AT MADISON SEVENTH AT LIBERTY
SEVENTH AT STADIUM AND GETTING
AT ARLINGTON.
THOSE ARE STILL BEING PLANNED
FOR WHEN WE LOOK AT WHERE WE
ARE CURRENTLY WITH THE CURRENT
DESIGN AND SELECTION OF WORK
FOR OUR BUFFORD BIKE LANES
THERE IS A MUCH MORE EXTENSIVE
LIST THAT I I BELIEVE WILL BE
ADDED ONTO.
BUT WE WERE LOOKING AT AT THE
TIME THE EXISTING PAINTED
BUFFORD BIKE LANES THAT WERE
ALREADY ON THE GROUND.
THOSE LOCATIONS FOR EXAMPLE
ALONG THE MAIN SECTION ON THAT
WAS LIKE THE STADIUM TO SELL
CHURCH.
THERE IS ONLY A NORTHBOUND
BUFFER ON THAT BIKE LANE.
SO WE BECAUSE AGAIN WE WERE NOT
GOING TO BE DOING PAVEMENT
MARKINGS.
WE WOULD ONLY BE ADDING THAT
LAYER OF PROTECTION ON THAT
NORTHBOUND.
SO JUST QUICKLY WE DID HAVE
ADDING PROTECTION THE CITY POST
IN THOSE PAINTED BUFFORD BIKE
LANES FROM SOUTH MAIN STREET
STADIUM STADIUM TO CYO CHURCH
BECAUSE THAT IS THERE IS ONLY
ONE NORTHBOUND LANE SOUTH MAIN
FROM WILLIAM ASSAEL CHURCH.
I DON'T UNDERSTAND THE
NORTHBOUND ONLY I WILL BE
FOLLOWING UP ON THAT.
SO THANK YOU FOR BRINGING THAT
TO MY ATTENTION.
S AND OUR SILENE TO FEEL
DEPRESSED AGAIN.
THERE WAS ONLY PAINTED BUFFER
NORTH MAPLE BOS TO DAXTER SEVEN
FROM WASHINGTON TO CHURCH
PAULENE STADIUM TO SEVENTH CYL
CHURCH MAPLE TO SEVEN AND THEN
VARIOUS SEGMENTS LONG PLYMOUTH
ROAD TO MORE MORE TO MAYDAN TO
UPLAND MIRFIN AND THEN ALONG
PACARD MAIN TO ST..
THERE IS A CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT
PROJECT MOVING FORWARD THAT IS
GOING TO ADD THAT LAYER
OF PROTECTION AS A SEPARATE
CAPITAL PROJECT SO WE WILL
ACTUALLY BE PULLING THAT
SEGMENT OUT OF OUR SAFE STREETS
FOR ALL AND WHEN THAT PROJECT
IS CONSTRUCTED WHICH IS
SUPPOSED TO BE IN TWENTY TWENTY
SIX THAT WORK WILL BE DONE AS
PART OF THAT IS PART OF THAT
CONTRACT SOME VERY IMPORTANT
BUT VERY PERSNICKETY MILESTONES
OF THIS GRANT THAT I AM
LEARNING ALL ABOUT LIKE I HAD
ALREADY MENTIONED IS NEPA AND
THAT STANDS FOR THE NATIONAL
ENVIRONMENTAL POLICY ACT AGAIN
WE COULD ONLY SUBMIT ONE NEPA
COMPLIANCE DOCUMENT FOR THE
ENTIRETY OF ALL OF THE
POTENTIAL GRANT ELEMENTS OR
BUILD BUILDINGS SPEED
MANAGEMENT.
OUR SUBMISSION WILL BE IN EARLY
JANUARY AND THE TIME FRAME FOR
REVIEW.
HER ADVICE THAT WE HAVE
RECEIVED FROM THE MICHIGAN I'M
SORRY THE FEDERAL HIGHWAY
MICHIGAN DIVISION IS AN
ESTIMATED TWO TO THREE MONTHS
AND YES YOU DID HEAR THAT RIGHT
MONTHS.
THIS IS NOT WEEKS FOLLOWING
THAT CONCLUSION OF THE NEPA
DOCUMENT PER AGAIN THE GRANT
AGREEMENT WE WILL HAVE TO AMEND
OUR GRANT AGREEMENT.
THIS HAS ALWAYS BEEN A
CONDITION OF THE GRANT
AGREEMENT AND WHAT THAT DOES IS
UNLOCK THE REMAINING FEDERAL
FUNDS FOR US TO ACTUALLY DO THE
CONSTRUCTION.
IF WE WERE TO DO ANY OF THIS
WORK BEFOREHAND, WE AT THE CITY
OF ANN ARBOR WOULD BE
COMPLETELY ON THE HOOK
FINANCIALLY FOR IT.
FEDERAL HIGHWAY WOULD NOT
REIMBURSE US FOR IT.
SO IT IS A VERY IMPORTANT STEP
THAT WE TIME APPROPRIATELY AND
PROPERLY TO ENSURE THAT WE DO
NOT DELAY ANY IMPLEMENTATION
EFFORTS LOOKING AT WHEN WE GET
BACK WE WILL IMMEDIATELY SUBMIT
FOR OUR AGREEMENT AMENDMENT AND
THAT WAS ESTIMATED TO TAKE
APPROXIMATELY SIX MONTHS.
I AM OPTIMISTIC THAT MAYBE
THESE TIME FRAMES WILL BE
SHORTER BUT I REALLY HAVE NO
WAY OF KNOWING IF THAT IS THE
INFORMATION THAT HAS BEEN
PROVIDED TO ME FROM OUR FEDERAL
HIGHWAY PARTNERS.
UM, NEXT STEPS IN DECEMBER.
WELL THIS MONTH DECEMBER IS
JUST GOING VERY, VERY QUICKLY
ON THE SAFE STREETS FOR ALL
PROJECT PAGE WHICH YOU CAN JUST
TYPE IN THE LETTERS S AS OR A
OR ASK FOR SAFE STREETS FOR ALL
IF YOU HAVE A VERBAL READER WE
DO HAVE AN INFORMATION MEETING
COMING UP IN EARLY JANUARY TO
PRESENT TO A PUBLIC WE WILL
HAVE A VERY SHORT SURVEY AND A
PRESENTATION RECORDING THAT
WILL GET IN A LITTLE BIT MORE
DEPTH THAN WHAT I HAVE THIS
EVENING.
THOSE OFFICE HOURS WILL BE ON
JANUARY THE SEVEN FROM SIX TO
SEVEN P.M. AND THOSE WILL BE
VIRTUAL.
THAT SURVEY WILL BE AVAILABLE
THROUGH MID TILL I BELIEVE IT'S
NOW LATE JANUARY.
SO MY SLIDE NEEDED TO BE
UPDATED AND THEN AGAIN AS A
REMINDER THIS SAM SCHWARTZ TEAM
WILL COME AND DO A BIG FULL
PRESENTATION AND DEEP DOVE TO
THE TRANSPORTATION COMMISSION
WHICH IS BUILT INTO THEIR
CONTRACT TO DO ONCE A YEAR AND
THAT IS THE END OF MY FLIGHT
DECK.
THANK YOU VERY MUCH AND I'M
SURE THERE ARE LOTS
OF QUESTIONS AND I AM READY TO
GO AGAIN.
>> I'M WAS QUICK ON THE ALSO
YOUR FIRST ABSOLUTELY.
>> THAT'S THE MILLION DOLLAR
QUESTION WHICH IS BY WHEN DO
YOU THINK THAT WE CAN ACTUALLY
SEE THINGS, YOU KNOW, BEING
INSTALLED SOME ARE TWENTY
TWENTY SIX.
>> OK, THANK YOU.
SO EVEN IF YOU'RE OPTIMISTIC
HOPES COME TO FRUITION FOR THE
GRANT AMENDMENT AS YOU KNOW SAY
THAT HAPPENS BY JUNE OR JULY
THERE JUST YOU DON'T THINK
THERE'D BE TIME TO LINE UP
CONSTRUCTION FOR THE LATTER
HALF OF NEXT YEAR?
>> OK, NO, I THINK THAT'S A
GOOD QUESTION BECAUSE YOU KNOW,
NOT ONLY DO WE HAVE TO DEVELOP
A BIG PACKAGE BUT THEN THAT BID
WILL HAVE TO BE ADVERTISED PER
CITY POLICIES AND THEN ALL
OF THE CONTRACTING WOULD BE
GOING BEFORE CITY COUNCIL AS
WELL.
SO I'M NOT SAYING THAT THAT IS
A BAD PROCESS.
I THINK THAT IS A WONDERFUL
PROCESS.
BUT WE DO NEED TO MAKE SURE
THAT WE FOLLOW NOT ONLY THE
CITY POLICIES BUT WE ALSO HAVE
FEDERAL PROCUREMENT POLICIES WE
HAVE TO ADHERE TO AS WELL.
SO THAT DOES ADD A LITTLE BIT
IN OUR DELAY.
BUT THAT'S WHY GETTING SOME
OF THESE IMPORTANT MILESTONES
NOW IS SO IMPORTANT AND THEN WE
CAN ALSO WHILE THOSE PROCESSES
ARE UNDERWAY KIND OF BEHIND THE
SCENES, WE CAN STILL WORK
THROUGH OUR PUBLIC ENGAGEMENT.
WE CAN DISCUSS WITH THE
COMMUNITY WHAT KIND OF DESIGN
OPTIONS ARE ON THE TABLE.
AND I'M GOING TO TELL YOU IT'S
NOT FULL RECONSTRUCTION.
THAT'S NOT WHAT WE GOT FUNDED
FOR.
SO WE HAVE TO SET SOME
REASONABLE EXPECTATIONS ABOUT
WHAT CAN AND CANNOT BE DONE
WITH THESE GRANT.
>> SURE.
OR FOLLOW UP QUESTION DOES THAT
INCLUDE THE INSTALLATION AND I
UNDERSTAND YOU CAN ONLY SUBMIT
THE ONE NIPA THING BUT IN TERMS
OF INSTALLATION BEING TWENTY
TWENTY SIX, DOES THAT INCLUDE
THE FLEX POST.
>> YES.
OK I GUESS IT JUST CONTINUES TO
BE MY THING BECAUSE AS YOU KNOW
PEOPLE ARE CONSTANTLY USING TO
SHORT TERM PARK AND WE CAN'T
EVEN KEEP UP WITH THE
ENFORCEMENT IF WE WANTED TO AND
I THINK IT'S JUST GOING TO
CONTINUE TO BE A PROBLEM AS
LONG AS WE MAKE IT EASY FOR
PEOPLE TO DO IT AS A CYCLIST I
FIND THAT VERY, VERY
FRUSTRATING AS WELL.
SO I CAN I
IT IS WELL HARD AND
I WISH WE COULD MOVE UP
OUR
DEADLINE AND I THINK THE ONLY
WAY THAT WE WOULD BE ABLE TO
MOVE THAT UP IS IF OUR GRANT
AGREEMENT AMENDMENT IS DONE
SOONER.
BUT AGAIN, REMEMBER WE DO STILL
HAVE CONSTRUCTION WINDOWS IN
THE STATE OF MICHIGAN.
WE CAN'T DO CERTAIN THINGS LIKE
THE PAVEMENT HAS TO BE WARM
ENOUGH FOR NEW TREATMENTS TO
ACTUALLY ADHERE TO PAVEMENT
PARKING.
SO IF IF IT'S TOO HOT, IF IT'S
TOO COLD, YOU KNOW THOSE
CONDITIONS HAVE TO BE JUST
RIGHT IN ORDER FOR THAT TO WORK
AS WELL.
SO THAT'S SOMETHING THAT WE
WANT TO BE MINDFUL OF TO TRY TO
GET THOSE TREATMENTS OUT AND
ALSO COORDINATE WITH EXISTING
LARGE SCALE EVENTS SUCH AS
FOOTBALL GAMES.
SO WE HAVE TO MAKE SURE THAT
WE'RE COGNIZANT OF NOT CAUSING
MORE POTENTIAL ISSUES WHILE WE
HAVE CONSTRUCTION CREWS OUT AS
WELL.
ERIC.
>> OH YEAH.
MY THREE POINT EIGHT MILLION
DOLLAR QUESTION BUT NOT ONE
OF YOU.
STERMAN BUT WHAT IS THE
LIKELIHOOD THAT THIS FUNDING IS
ACTUALLY GOING TO BE THERE
GIVEN THE CHANGE IN
ADMINISTRATION AND LIKE WE'RE
LOOKING AT A LONGER TIMELINE
NOW OF ANOTHER YEAR AND A HALF
UNTIL WE ACTUALLY START
SPENDING THE MONEY ON
INSTALLATION OF THESE HARD AND
CENTER LINES BARRIERS.
IS THERE A DANGER THAT WE WILL
GET THROUGH COMMUNITY
ENGAGEMENT AND FIND THAT WE DO
NOT ACTUALLY HAVE THIS GRANT
ANY LONGER?
>> I CANNOT AND I'M SPECULATING
THERE ARE I THINK A LOT
OF OTHER PEOPLE AROUND THE ROOM
I'M LOOKING AT MATT WHO HAS
BEEN IN THE FEDERAL FUNDING
GAME PROBABLY MUCH LONGER THAN
MYSELF.
I CANNOT IMAGINE THAT WOULD
HAPPEN BUT I'D LOVE IT IF
SOMEBODY ELSE WOULD TAKE A JUMP
IN IN THAT I'LL JUMP IN A
LITTLE BIT.
SO SUSAN NAME CHECKED ME SO I
RUN THE TRANSIT AGENCY UNDER
NORMAL TIMES INCOMING EXECUTIVE
BRANCHES WILL HONOR ALL OF THE
DECISIONS OF THE PREVIOUS ONE
AND GRANTS THAT ARE IN PROGRESS
LIKE THIS ONE SORT OF IS IT'S
BEEN AWARDED, CORRECT SUSAN?
CORRECT.
SO USUALLY UNDER NORMAL
CIRCUMSTANCES AND I MEAN LIKE
GOING BACK TO NINETEEN FIFTY.
YEAH.
THEY JUST SAY LOOK THAT STUFF
WAS DONE WAS DONE LEGITIMATELY
WE'RE JUST WE'RE NOT GOING TO
CHANGE IT WE MAY CHANGE A GRANT
PROGRAM.
WE MAY NOT GIVE OUT ANY NEW
AWARDS LIKE THAT.
WE MAY HAVE A DIFFERENT
IDEOLOGICAL PRIORITY BUT THE
ONES THAT ARE ALREADY IN
PROGRESS AND AWARDED IT WOULD
BE UNFAIR FOR THE FEDERAL
GOVERNMENT TO PULL THE CARPET
OUT FROM THE RECIPIENTS.
SO THAT IS THE TRADITION AND
IT'S ENSHRINED IN VARIOUS
REGULATIONS AND LAWS THAT SAID
,THE INCOMING ADMINISTRATION
HAS SAID THEY DON'T LIKE A LOT
OF THAT STUFF AND THERE IS A
RISK I WOULD SAY IT'S SMALL.
THIS IS NOT A HIGH PRIORITY FOR
THE INCOMING ADMINISTRATION
FROM WHAT WE CAN TELL.
BUT THERE IS A SMALL RISK I
THINK WITH THIS ONE THIS IS
THIS IS PRETTY FAR DOWN THE
TRACK.
SUSAN, IT SOUNDS LIKE YOU'RE
WELL PAST OBLIGATION.
>> YES, WE'VE BEEN SUBMITTING
AND RECEIVING REIMBURSEMENTS
FROM THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT SO
THAT'S WHY MY FEELS VERY, VERY
LOW.
>> YEAH, I THINK THIS ONE IS
ALMOST ONE HUNDRED PERCENT
GUARANTEED TO JUST CONTINUE
WHETHER OR NOT WE'LL GET
ANOTHER ONE LIKE THIS.
THAT'S A GOOD QUESTION BUT I
THINK GRANTS LIKE THIS ARE
PROBABLY FINE.
>> THAT'S JUST MY PROFESSIONAL
BUT THANK I REALLY DO
APPRECIATE THAT.
ANY OTHER QUESTIONS?
WELL, A QUICK FOLLOW WAS ALL
THAT SAD THIS ONE THE WAY IT'S
STRUCTURED SO DIFFERENT IT'S
STRADDLED IN BETWEEN THE
PLANNING TYPE OF AWARD AND A
DEPLOYMENT AWARD.
SO I MENTIONED ABOUT THE
OBLIGATION SO WAS THAT FOR ME
IF I'M WRONG I THINK OUR
OBLIGATION GOES BY THE THE SAME
PORTION OR CADENCE AS THE GRANT
AMENDMENT.
SO WE'RE SO FAR OBLIGATED ONLY
FOR THE FIRST PORTION WHICH IS
APPROXIMATELY FOUR MILLION
DOLLARS.
YES, WE HAVE BEEN LIKE YOU
SHALL SPEND FEDERAL DOLLARS AND
GET REIMBURSED BY THE BULK
OF THE THE AWARD HAS NOT BEEN
OBLIGATED.
>> THAT IS ABSOLUTELY
FIRST
TIME IS HAVE TO CROSS HOPEFULLY
WE DON'T OR ANY OTHER QUESTIONS
.
EVANS IF NOT WE'LL LOOK FORWARD
TO ANOTHER UPDATE IN THE
SPRING.
I BELIEVE SO.
THANK YOU VERY MUCH THOUGH
SUZANNE FOR BRINGING THAT
FORWARD AND ANSWERING ALL THE
QUESTIONS INCLUDING THE PUBLIC
COMMENTS QUESTIONS.
ALL RIGHT.
NEXT UP, YOU TRANSPORTATION
RESEARCH INSTITUTE UPDATE YOU
ABOUT TRANSPORTATION RESEARCH
INSTITUTE HAS BEEN WORKING WITH
THE CITY SINCE 2012 TO DEPLOY
AND TEST CONNECTED VEHICLE
TECHNOLOGY AND EXPLORE VARIOUS
APPLICATIONS INCLUDING TRAFFIC
SAFETY AND TRANSIT PRIORITY
RESEARCH RESULTS POTENTIALLY
WILL BECOME AVAILABLE TO OUR
DAY TO DAY OPERATIONS AND SO
THE RESEARCH TEAM NOW WILL
PROVIDE AN UPDATE TO THE
ONGOING AND FUTURE PROJECTS.
SO DEBBIE, WELCOME AND I THINK
THE FLOOR IS YOURS.
>> IT LOOKS LIKE YOU'RE SHARING
THE SCREEN ALREADY.
I THINK I NEED TO DO ONE LITTLE
THING HERE.
I ALWAYS FORGET THIS.
I THINK WE'RE OK.
NAME FOR I DON'T SEE WHERE IT
IS.
THERE'S A PART IN HERE WHERE I
CAN SHARE MY MY FAVORITE ARE MY
AUDIO FROM MY COMPUTER BECAUSE
I DO HAVE A VIDEO BUT I DON'T
SEE IT ON THE SCREEN SO I GUESS
WE'LL GET THERE WHEN WE GET
THERE BUT OK.
ALL RIGHT UM WELL THANK YOU NO
ONE SO GOOD EVENING EVERYBODY.
THANKS SO MUCH FOR HAVING ME
HERE.
LUKLA WHOM YOU ALL KNOW INVITED
ME TO TALK ABOUT OUR PROJECTS
THAT WE'RE DEPLOYING ARE
PLANNING ON DEPLOYING IN ANN
ARBOR FROM A PROGRAM MANAGERS
PERSPECTIVE.
SO AFTER MUCH DELIBERATION I
DECIDED TO BEGIN WITH A STORY
OF HOW I GOT HERE AND WHY I DO
WHAT I DO.
I STARTED MY CAREER AT FORD
MOTOR COMPANY BACK IN NINETEEN
EIGHTY SEVEN.
YES I AM THAT OLD AND TO THOSE
OF YOU WHO ARE THINKING WOW SHE
LOOKS GREAT FOR HER AGE I THINK
ANYWAY I DID ALSO DID TIME AT
GENERAL MOTORS WHILE AT FORD GM
I MOSTLY WORKED ON ENGINE AND
TRANSMISSION CONTROL MODULES IN
2001 I TOOK A BIG CHANCE IN MY
CAREER AND STARTED WORKING AT
VISTEON IN SAFETY.
WE WERE DEVELOPING RADAR AND
VISION BASED TECHNOLOGIES FOR
ADVANCED DRIVER SYSTEMS AND
THAT'S WHEN I REALIZED THAT FOR
THE FIRST 13 YEARS OF MY CAREER
I HATED MY JOB.
I LOVED WORKING IN ADVANCED
DRIVER AWARENESS SYSTEMS.
IT BECAME MY PASSION.
THESE FUTURIST TECHNOLOGIES
WERE SAVED WHERE THEY WERE
GOING TO SAVE LIVES.
I WAS GOING TO SAVE LIVES AND
NOW THIS TECHNOLOGY IS ON
ALMOST ALL NEW VEHICLES BLIND
SPOT DETECTION, FORWARD
COLLISION WARNING, DECEPTIVE
CRUISE CONTROL AND MORE WHILE
WORKING AT VISTEON I HAD THE
PLEASURE OF WORKING WITH THE
UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
TRANSPORTATION RESEARCH
INSTITUTE ON TWO LARGE FIELD
OPERATIONAL TESTS THAT WERE
PROVING OUT THIS NEW TECHNOLOGY
AND IN 2011 THEY ASKED ME TO
JOIN THEIR TEAM TO WORK ON THE
WORLD'S FIRST AND LARGEST
CONNECTED VEHICLE REAL WORLD
DEPLOYMENT.
AND THAT'S HOW I GOT HERE TO
TALK TO ALL OF YOU ABOUT MY
PASSION FOR EMERGING TECHNOLOGY
AND TRANSPORTATION TO SAVE
LIVES, IMPROVE MOBILITY AND
IMPROVE OUR CARBON FOOTPRINT IN
TWENTY TWENTY ONE NEARLY FORTY
THREE THOUSAND LIVES WERE LOST
ON US ROADWAYS CONNECTED
VEHICLE TECHNOLOGY COULD HAVE
PREVENTED AT LEAST 80 PERCENT
OF THE UNEMPOWERED CRASHES.
CONNECTED VEHICLE TECHNOLOGY
CAN IMPROVE MOBILITY THROUGH
CONGESTION MANAGEMENT
APPLICATIONS.
IT CAN GET PEOPLE AND GOODS
QUICKLY AND SAFELY TO OTHER
DESTINATIONS CONNECTED VEHICLE
TECHNOLOGY IS GOOD FOR THE
ENVIRONMENT.
IT REDUCES OUR CARBON FOOTPRINT
THROUGH SUSTAINABILITY
APPLICATIONS SUCH AS GREEN
WAVING WHERE VEHICLES
COMMUNICATE WITH THE
INFRASTRUCTURE TO DETERMINE THE
BEST SPEED TO MAINTAIN TRAVEL
THROUGH A CORRIDOR WHERE THE
DRIVER WOULDN'T NEED TO BREAK
OR ACCELERATE.
I KNOW THAT DR. HENRY LOU AND
DR. JAMES SAYER PROVIDED AN
OVERVIEW OF THE PROJECTS AND
TECHNOLOGIES BACK IN JULY SO
I'LL TRY TO LIMIT ANY
DUPLICATION.
I ALSO KNOW THAT THEY SHOWED
THIS SLIDE IN PARTICULAR BUT
IT'S IMPORTANT TO THIS
DISCUSSION.
IT'S THE START OF OUR STORY THE
PARTNERSHIP BETWEEN THE CITY
OF ANN ARBOR AND THE UNIVERSITY
OF MICHIGAN.
WE HAVE BEEN PARTNERS WITH THE
CITY OF ANN ARBOR SINCE 2011
WHEN WE FIRST STARTED DEPLOYING
CONNECTED VEHICLE TECHNOLOGY IN
ANN ARBOR FOR THE SAFETY PILOT
MODEL DEPLOYMENT DURING THE
TRANSITION FROM SAFETY PILOT
MODEL DEPLOYMENT TO TODAY'S
PROJECT THE ANN ARBOR CONNECTED
ENVIRONMENT TO PLANO.
THERE'S BEEN A LOT
OF BACKGROUND ACTIVITY IN THE
INDUSTRY MAKING THE PATH TO
DEPLOYMENT VERY HARD.
SO I'M GOING TO DESCRIBE THE
EVOLUTION OF CONNECTED VEHICLE
TECHNOLOGY FIRST THERE WAS
SARSAE DEDICATED SHORT RANGE
COMMUNICATION.
IT IT'S WHAT'S DEPLOYED IN THE
SAFETY PILOT MODEL DEPLOYMENT
AND THE ANN ARBOR CONNECTED
TEST ENVIRONMENT.
SO THE FIRST TWO PROJECTS THEN
THERE WAS TAX CELLULAR VEHICLE
TO EVERYTHING WHICH IS BEING
DEPLOYED IN THE SMART
INTERSECTIONS PROJECT AND THE
ANN ARBOR CONNECTED ENVIRONMENT
TO POINT OUT.
AND THEN THERE WAS THE FCC
WHICH I'LL GET TO IN A MINUTE
WHAT IS DEDICATED SHORT RANGE
COMMUNICATION.
IT'S LIKE WI-FI BUT USES
DEDICATED OPTIMUS
CHANNEL WITH
VERY LOW LATENCY AND INSTEAD
OF USING A WIRELESS LOCAL AREA
NETWORK THROUGH ACCESS POINTS
LIKE WE DO WITH OUR COMPUTER
REQUIRES DIRECT BROADCAST
WIRELESS COMMUNICATION.
IT'S SECURE IN PRIVATE IN
TWENTY SIXTEEN NIZZA ISSUED A
NOTICE OF PROPOSED RULEMAKING
THAT WOULD HAVE REQUIRED
CONNECTED VEHICLE TECHNOLOGY ON
ALL NEW VEHICLES.
THE RULEMAKING WAS BASED OFF
THE DATA COLLECTED DURING
SAFETY PILOT MODEL DEPLOYMENT
AND THE SUBSEQUENT ANALYSIS BY
INDEPENDENT EVALUATOR VOLPI IN
TWO THOUSAND SEVENTEEN GM
INTRODUCED DEDICATED SHORT
RANGE COMMUNICATIONS ON THEIR
CADILLAC CTS.
HOWEVER THE NOTICE OF PROPOSED
RULEMAKING FOR DEDICATED SHORT
RANGE COMMUNICATIONS WAS NOT
ENACTED BECAUSE OF THE NEW
ADMINISTRATION THAT CAME INTO
OFFICE IN TWENTY SEVENTEEN
TRUMP'S FIRST VISIT TO THE
WHITE HOUSE THIS GAVE RISE TO
THE INTRODUCTION OF CELLULAR
VEHICLE TO EVERYTHING OR CIVITA
PLEASE REMEMBER THAT ACRONYM
BECAUSE I'M GOING TO BE USING
IT A LOT CIVITA AND I MAY
OCCASIONALLY THROW IN D.R.C.
WHEN I FORGET TO SPELL IT SO
CIVITA X IS SIMILAR TO
DEDICATED SHORT RANGE
COMMUNICATION AND THEN IT ALSO
REQUIRES DIRECT DEVICE TO
DEVICE COMMUNICATION.
HOWEVER CIVITA X USES WHAT IS
CALLED A CELLULAR PC FIVE
CITILINK.
THAT'S NOT REALLY THE IMPORTANT
PART.
IT USES DIRECT COMMUNICATION
FOR SAFETY CRITICAL
APPLICATIONS THAT'S THE
IMPORTANT PART CIVITA THE X
ALSO BRINGS IN NETWORK
COMMUNICATIONS FOR NON
TIME-SENSITIVE APPLICATION.
IT'S KNOWN AS THE U.
U LINK WHICH UTILIZES A CELL
TOWER JUST LIKE WHEN YOU MAKE A
CALL ON YOUR CELL PHONE.
SO THAT BRINGS US TO THE FCC IN
NINETEEN NINETY NINE THE FCC
ALLOCATED SEVENTY FIVE
MEGAHERTZ TO BE USED FOR
INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION
SERVICES.
IT'S COMMONLY REFERRED TO AS
THE SAFETY SPECTRUM OR THE FIVE
POINT NINE GIGAHERTZ BAND.
THE MAIN POINT IS THAT IT'S
DEDICATED NO ONE ELSE CAN
BROADCAST IN THE BAND BECAUSE
OF THE UNCERTAINTY WITHOUT A
MANDATE, NONE OF THE AUTOMOBILE
MANUFACTURERS DEPLOYED THIS
TECHNOLOGY.
GM DISCONTINUED THE DRC AND
THEIR SEATS AND AS TIME PASSED
THERE'S LIMITED USE OF THE
SAFETY SPECTRUM THE FCC ISSUED
THEIR FIRST REPORT IN ORDER IN
OCTOBER OF TWENTY TWENTY.
THE ORDER TOOK AWAY FORTY FIVE
MEGAHERTZ FROM THE BAND AND
LEFT ESSENTIALLY ONE BAND OR
ONE CHANNEL FOR CIVITA TO AX.
IT'S HIGHLY UNUSUAL FOR THE FCC
TO MANDATE A SPECIFIC
TECHNOLOGY BUT THEY DID IN THE
SECOND REPORT IN ORDER THAT WAS
ISSUED LAST MONTH ALL DEDICATED
SHORT RANGE COMMUNICATION UNITS
MUST CEASE TO OPERATE BY TWENTY
TWENTY SIX CIRCLING BACK TO THE
ANN ARBOR DEPLOYMENT'S US
YACHTIE THE UNIVERSITY
OF MICHIGAN AND PROGRAM
PARTNERS LIKE THE CITY
OF BANABA HAVE INVESTED OVER 80
MILLION IN THE CONNECTED
INFRASTRUCTURE IN ANN ARBOR.
TOGETHER WE ARE MAKING AN HOUR
A MODEL FOR NATIONAL
DEPLOYMENT.
WHAT IS DONE HERE WILL BE
DUPLICATED ACROSS THE COUNTRY.
WE ARE PART OF THE MOVEMENT.
WE ARE PART OF USDOT NATIONAL
DEPLOYMENT PLAN.
WE HAVE BEEN CALLED TO ACTION
AND I AM VERY PROUD OF THE WORK
THAT WE'RE DOING AND I KNOW
THAT IT WILL HAVE AN IMPACT
IMPACT.
IT IS WHY I WORKED TIRELESSLY
TO BRING CONNECTED VEHICLE
TECHNOLOGY TO MARKET.
AFTER ALL WE ALL HAVE A
TRANSPORTATION STORY.
MY STORY IS THAT I WAS IN AN
ACCIDENT SEVERAL YEARS AGO THAT
ONE HUNDRED PERCENT COULD HAVE
BEEN AVOIDED WITH CONNECTED
VEHICLE TECHNOLOGY.
I WAS TURNING LEFT AND TRAFFIC
WAS BACKED UP AT THE LIGHT SO
WHERE I WAS TURNING THERE WAS
TWO LANES OF TRAFFIC AND THEN
THERE WAS THIS THIRD LANE WHICH
WAS THE RIGHT TURN LANE FOUR
FOR THEM.
SO I'M TRYING TO GO ACROSS BUT
I CAN'T SEE THAT THIRD LANE.
SO TWO CARS STOPPED AND LEFT
ROOM FOR ME TO GO THROUGH BUT I
GOT HIT BY THE CAR IN THE RIGHT
TURN LANE AND HE COULD HAVE
BEEN DOING FORTY FIVE MILES AN
HOUR THE WAY IT FELT I HIT MY
KNEE ON THE BOLSTER AND IT
HURTS ME TILL TODAY AND I CAN
NEVER I WILL NEVER BE ABLE TO
KNEEL AGAIN AND IN THE GRAND
SCHEME OF THINGS THIS WAS
RELATIVELY MINOR.
I HAVE A FEW MORE STORIES TO
SHARE.
THESE ARE SOME PICTURES OF AN
ACCIDENT THAT MY DAUGHTER'S TWO
FRIENDS WERE IN DURING THEIR
SENIOR YEAR OF HIGH SCHOOL
WHICH IS ABOUT THREE YEARS AGO.
THEY WERE ON THE OHIO TURNPIKE
BETWEEN CLEVELAND AND TOLEDO
AFTER THE ACCIDENT ONE WAS
UNCONSCIOUS AND HER FRIEND
THOUGHT OR FEARED SHE WAS
DEAD .
SHE SUSTAINED A HEAD INJURY.
OBVIOUSLY THE JAWS OF LIFE HAD
TO PULL BOTH OF THEM OUT.
ONE WAS AIRLIFTED TO THE
UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN HOSPITAL
AND THE ONE GIRL SHE SUSTAINED
A HEAD INJURY LEFT BROKEN
COLLARBONE, BROKEN TEETH BROKEN
LEFT HAND WHIPLASH BROKEN LEFT
JAW BROKEN RIGHT ARM.
HER FACE HAD HUNDREDS OF CUTS
FROM THE GLASS.
SHE WAS HOSPITALIZED FOR EIGHT
WEEKS.
THIS IS A PICTURE OF HER CAR
AND THIS IS A PICTURE OF THE
BACK UP THAT THE ACCIDENT
CAUSED.
I COUNTED ABOUT TEN VEHICLES
INVOLVED IN THE ACCIDENT THIS
ACCIDENT THAT MY DAUGHTER'S
FRIENDS WERE AND COULD HAVE
BEEN AVOIDED WITH CONNECTED
VEHICLE TECHNOLOGY.
TODAY'S SENSORS CAN NOT
RELIABLY DETECT AND INTERPRET
WHAT'S HAPPENING ON THE ROAD
FAR AHEAD IN BAD WEATHER WE
NEED CONNECTED VEHICLE
TECHNOLOGY TO DO THAT.
>> OK, OK, SO I'M GOING TO SHOW
YOU A VIDEO.
IT'S VERY GRAPHIC AND VERY
DISTURBING.
SO YOU MAY WANT TO LOOK AWAY OR
MUTE YOUR AUDIO.
>> THIS IS ANOTHER EXAMPLE
WHERE CONNECTED VEHICLE
TECHNOLOGY COULD AVOID AN
ACCIDENT.
THIS EXAMPLE IS A MASSIVE CHAIN
REACTION REACTION ACCIDENT THAT
OCCURRED ON NINETY FOUR NEAR
GALESBURG IN KALAMAZOO COUNTY
BACK IN TWO THOUSAND FIFTEEN WE
HAD A REALLY BAD SNOWSTORM.
IT WAS SIXTEEN DEGREES
FAHRENHEIT OUTSIDE ZERO DEGREES
WITH THE WINDCHILL.
IT WAS BLUSTERY AND SNOWY.
VISIBILITY WAS LOW.
THE ROAD WAS ICY.
ONE VEHICLE HIT ANOTHER THEN
ANOTHER THEN ANOTHER.
A HUNDRED AND NINETY THREE
VEHICLES IN TOTAL WERE INVOLVED
.
TWENTY ONE PEOPLE WERE
HOSPITALIZED MIRACULOUSLY ONLY
ONE DIED.
LOCAL AUTHORITIES USE ANY BUS
THEY COULD GET THEIR HANDS ON
TO GO TO THE CRASH SITE TO
RESCUE THE STRANDED TRAVELERS
ALL THE WHILE STOPPING THEIR
LOCAL BUS SERVICE.
THE FREEWAY WAS SHUT DOWN FOR
TWO DAYS TODAY.
CENSOR'S HELP IN THESE
SITUATIONS BUT CONNECTED
VEHICLE TECHNOLOGY CAN.
THAT'S WHY IT'S SO IMPORTANT TO
GET CONNECTED VEHICLE
TECHNOLOGY ON THE ROAD.
THE BOTTOM LINE IS THAT
CONNECTED VEHICLE TECHNOLOGY
CREATES GREATER SITUATIONAL
AWARENESS.
IT EXCHANGES INFORMATION
BETWEEN VEHICLES, BETWEEN
BICYCLISTS, BETWEEN PEDESTRIANS
AND BETWEEN THE INFRASTRUCTURE.
YOU KNOW WHEN WHEN LAUREN WAS
TALKING EARLIER ABOUT THE
BICYCLISTS, I HAVE A SOLUTION
FOR THAT CONNECTED VEHICLE
TECHNOLOGY.
IT'S A I WOULD SAY CONNECTED
VEHICLE TECHNOLOGY IS THE BEST
INVENTION SINCE SLICED BREAD.
SO SENSORS TODAY SENSORS HAVE A
LIMITED FIELD OF VIEW AND RANGE
CONNECTED VEHICLE TECHNOLOGY IS
MUCH LONGER RANGE THREE HUNDRED
METERS WITH HIGH ACCURACY WHERE
A RADAR SENSOR IS ABOUT SEVENTY
FIVE METERS YOU CAN GO ONE
HUNDRED AND FIFTY BUT IT
DOESN'T HAVE REALLY GOOD
ACCURACY AT THAT POINT.
IT ALSO HAS A NARROW FIELD
OF VIEW.
I LIKE TO SEE THAT CONNECTED
VEHICLE CAN SEE AROUND CORNERS
SO INSTEAD OF A BEAM IT'S MORE
LIKE A CLOUD ENCOMPASSING A
MUCH LARGER AREA WE WE CAN
SORRY I LOST MY TRAIN
OF THOUGHT AND SO WE CONNECTED.
WE CAN NOW CONNECT VEHICLES,
TRANSIT INFRASTRUCTURE,
VULNERABLE ROAD USERS, WIRELESS
DEVICES AND OTHER SENSORS.
FOR INSTANCE WE CAN USE
SPECIFIC MESSAGES TO TRANSMIT
THE LOCATION OF PEDESTRIANS TO
CONNECTED VEHICLES USING
INFORMATION FROM A CAMERA AT AN
INTERSECTION REALLY THAT
DESCRIBES WHAT WE'RE DOING IN
THE SMART INTERSECTIONS PROJECT
.
NOW LET'S GET TO SOME SPECIFICS
ABOUT THE AND OUR CONNECTED
ENVIRONMENT 2.0.
WE AIM TO BE THE NATIONAL
REFERENCE FOR CELLULAR VEHICLE
TO EVERYTHING TECHNOLOGY
SETTING THE BENCHMARK FOR
COMMERCIAL LARGE SCALE ADOPTION
AND ESTABLISHING A TRUSTED
RELIABLE INFRASTRUCTURE
NETWORK.
THIS IS IN ALIGNMENT WITH MANY
USDOT GOALS IN GENERAL AND FOR
A TEAM TO ATTAIN IS IS THE
GRANT THAT THE FEDERAL GRANT
THAT THIS PROJECT FALLS UNDER
AND FOR A TEAM USDOT WANTS TO
INVEST IN ADVANCED EBITA
TECHNOLOGIES THEY WANT TO
RETROFIT THE DEDICATED SHORT
RANGE COMMUNICATION DEVICES
LIKE WE HAD IN ANN ARBOR WITH
CELLULAR BEAT X THEY WANT TO
REDUCE THE NUMBER AND SEVERITY
OF TRAFFIC CRASHES BY
INCREASING SAFETY.
THEY WANT TO ACCELERATE THE
DEPLOYMENT OF THE X AND THEY
WANT KNOWLEDGED TRANSFER FROM A
DEPLOYMENT LIKE OURS TO OTHERS
IN THIS SPACE.
THIS PAST AUGUST USDOT ISSUED
THEIR V TO X DEPLOYMENT PLAN
TITLED SAVING LIVES WITH
CONNECTIVITY A PLAN TO
ACCELERATE B TO X DEPLOYMENT
THE ANN ARBOR CONNECTED
ENVIRONMENT TWO POINT SUPPORTS
THIS PLAN IN THE SHORT TERM
TWENTY TWENTY FOUR TO TWENTY
TWENTY EIGHT USDOT ENVISIONS
TWELVE INTEROPERABLE
CYBERSECURITY DEPLOYMENTS AND
BY TWENTY THIRTY SIX THEY
ENVISIONED FIFTY OF THESE CITY
WIDE DEPLOYMENTS THAT IS WHAT
THE ANN ARBOR CONNECTED
ENVIRONMENT IS AND WHY IT'S SO
IMPORTANT AND FRANKLY WHY I'M
SO PASSIONATE AND EXCITED ABOUT
IT.
MY VISION IS THAT WE LIVE IN A
WORLD WHERE WE ASK CAN YOU
IMAGINE A CAR WITHOUT CONNECTED
VEHICLE TECHNOLOGY MUCH LIKE WE
WOULD SAY ABOUT A CAR WITHOUT
SEATBELTS.
>> THE NEVER CONNECTED
ENVIRONMENT IS A THREE YEAR
NEARLY 13 MILLION DOLLAR
PROJECT AT A HIGH LEVEL WE WILL
REPLACE THE DEDICATED SHORT
RANGE COMMUNICATION DEVICES THE
ANN ARBOR INFRASTRUCTURE WITH
CELLULAR B TO ACCESS EQUIPMENT,
EQUIPMENT USED ONE HUNDRED
VEHICLES WITH CB RADIOS AND
LEVERAGE THE EXISTING EFFORTS
SPECIFICALLY THE SMART
INTERSECTION PROJECT BY TAKING
ADVANTAGE OF THE RADIO TESTING
AND
DEVELOPMENT SO THAT WE'RE
NOT STARTING FROM GROUND ZERO.
WE'VE ALREADY INSTALLED KBE TO
EXIT TWENTY ONE INTERSECTIONS
THROUGH THE SMART INTERSECTIONS
PROJECT.
>> THE INFRASTRUCTURE IS BEING
RETURNED TO ITS FORMER GLORY
BACK IN THE ANN ARBOR CONNECTED
VEHICLE TESTED ENVIRONMENT DAYS
WE HAD A SEVENTY FIVE ROADSIDE
UNIT FOOTPRINT AND SO WE ARE
GOING TO HAVE SEVENTY FIVE
ROADSIDE UNITS BY THE END
OF THE ANN ARBOR CONNECTED
ENVIRONMENT TWO POINT PROJECT
AND SOME OF THOSE ARE ISSUES
WILL BE LOCATED TO SUPPORT THE
CITY'S UPCOMING PROJECTS LIKE
THE DEDICATED BUS LANE AND
STATE WILLIAMS
LOST MY HAVE
TOTALLY LOST MY SEDRICK SO THIS
TEAM WILL INCORPORATE WORK FROM
5G AUTOMOTIVE ASSOCIATION, THE
SOCIETY OF AUTOMOTIVE ENGINEERS
UTAH AND THE SECURITY
CREDENTIAL MANAGEMENT SYSTEM
MANAGER TO ESTABLISH A VERIFIED
STATE OF THE ART ENVIRONMENT
FOR CERTIFIED VEHICLE AND
INFRASTRUCTURE MESSAGES.
UTAH HAS A SMART GRANT WHERE
THEY HAVE BEEN TESTING OUT SOME
OF THE CERTIFICATION PROCESSES
THAT WE WILL NEED FOR THIS
PROJECT.
AUTO MANUFACTURERS AND OTHERS
WILL BE ABLE TO USE THE
ENVIRONMENT TO TEST
PREPRODUCTION CONNECTED VEHICLE
SAFETY MOBILITY SUSTAINABILITY
AND AUTOMATED AUTOMOTIVE
AUTOMATED APPLICATIONS.
THE AUTO MANUFACTURERS AND TIER
ONE SUPPLIERS WILL BE BRINGING
THEIR VEHICLES TO ANN ARBOR FOR
TESTING IN THE REAL WORLD THIS
SUPPORTS THE USDOLLAR
DEPLOYMENT PLAN BY PROVIDING A
CRITICAL PATH TO
COMMERCIALIZATION ANOTHER WAY
THAT WE'RE GOING TO SUPPORT
COMMERCIALIZATION THROUGH HEAT
MAP TESTING WITH AUTO
MANUFACTURERS TO VERIFY THEIR
APPLICATION PERFORMANCE.
AUTO MANUFACTURERS ARE
DEVELOPING WHAT WE CALL DAY ONE
APPLICATIONS AS DEFINED BY THE
5G AUTOMOTIVE AUTOMOTIVE
ASSOCIATION.
WE WILL EQUIP A FLEET OF AT
LEAST TWENTY FIVE VEHICLES WITH
ONBOARD UNITS SENDING WHAT WE
CALL A BASIC SAFETY MESSAGE THE
BASIC SAFETY MESSAGE AT WHAT IS
WHAT MAKES THE COMMUNICATION
BETWEEN VEHICLES POSSIBLE.
IT'S DEFINED IN THE SOCIETY
OF AUTOMOTIVE ENGINEERS
INDUSTRY STANDARDS SO THAT ALL
VEHICLES WILL UNDERSTAND IT.
A GM CAN COMMUNICATE WITH THE
NISSAN OR ANY OTHER VEHICLE IT
IS NONPROPRIETARY FORMAT FOR
ALL TO USE.
THE BASIC SAFETY MESSAGE
CONTAINS VEHICLES POSITION
SPEED AND HEADING PLUS OTHER
ATTRIBUTES SUCH AS VEHICLE TYPE
WITH AND LENGTH DURING
CONCENTRATE TEST PERIODS THESE
VEHICLES WILL BE DRIVEN AND
PRESCRIBED ROUTES ALLOWING
MANUFACTURERS VEHICLES TO
INTERACT WITH A SUBSTANTIAL
NUMBER OF OTHER VEHICLES.
SO WHEN THEY COME OUT JUST BY
THEMSELVES THEY REALLY CAN'T
EXERCISE THEIR FULL SYSTEM IN A
REPEATABLE WAY.
SO THEY NEED TO HAVE SOME
CONCENTRATED OTHER VEHICLES
BETTER EQUIPPED AND SO THAT'S
WHAT WE DO IS WE'RE WORKING
WITH THESE OEMS.
WE JUST HAD A WORKSHOP IN
NOVEMBER AND DEVELOPING WHAT
ARE THE SCENARIOS THAT THEY
NEED AND THEN WE'LL TAKE THAT
BACK AND SAY OK, HERE'S WHERE
WE DO THAT IN ANN ARBOR AND
WE'VE DONE THIS BEFORE AND IT
WAS QUITE SUCCESSFUL.
SO WE DID IT I THINK DURING
EITHER HCB OR THE OPERATIONS
AND MAINTENANCE PHASE.
SO THE MAP TESTING WILL FOLLOW
THREE STAGES.
FIRST WE STARTED CITY WILL
ENSURE THAT THE COMMUNICATIONS
BETWEEN THE AUTOMAKERS VEHICLES
IN THE FLEET VEHICLES WORK,
THAT THEY'RE INTEROPERABLE AND
THEN SECOND WILL TEST THE
APPLICATIONS AT CITI.
SO DO SOME OF THE SCENARIOS
THAT WE PLAN DOING ON THE
STREETS OF ANN ARBOR AND THEN
LASTLY WE'LL BRING THAT
APPLICATION TESTING ON THE
STREETS OF ANN MABASO IN AND
AROUND ANN ARBOR WITH THE
POSSIBILITY OF INTERACTING WITH
THE INFRASTRUCTURE MESSAGES
SUCH AS SPATT WHICH IS SIGNAL
PHASE AND TIMING AND MAP WHICH
IS THE GEOMETRIC DESCRIPTION
OF THE INTERSECTION TESTING IS
SLATED TO BEGIN IN THE FALL
OF TWENTY TWENTY FIVE AND THE
TESTING WILL BE CONDUCTED FOR
ONE WEEK EACH QUARTER AND I
WOULD NOT BE ANY KIND
OF PROGRAM MANAGER IF I DIDN'T
TOUCH UPON THE SCHEDULE SO
WE'LL TALK ABOUT THAT JUST VERY
BRIEFLY, WE'RE CURRENTLY
FINISHING UP THE REQUIREMENTS
DEVELOPMENT EARLY NEXT YEAR
WILL ISSUE AN RFP AND PROCURE
THE CV TEXT DEVICES BY MID NEXT
YEAR WE'LL BE READY TO INSTALL
AND WILL CERTIFY THE
INTERSECTIONS AND ONCE COMPLETE
ENTER THE OPERATIONS
MAINTENANCE PHASE.
SO I HAVE A FEW LESSONS LEARNED
.
FIRST IS INTEROPERABILITY IS
NOT JUST ABOUT THE DEVICE
LEVEL.
IT'S ARCHITECTURE MUST BE
DESIGNED AROUND SPECIFIC
EYEHOLE ARCHITECTURE
CONSTRAINTS, SYSTEM ENGINEERING
MATTERS, TECHNICAL REQUIREMENTS
USE CASES, NONFUNCTIONAL
REQUIREMENTS FROM THE USER
PERSPECTIVE AND THEN WE HAVE
THIS ONE SHIFT LEFT ON
SECURITY.
SO THIS IS A REALLY BIG LESSON
LEARNED FOR US.
ASSESS THE CYBER SECURITY RISK
MANAGEMENT MATURITY OF YOUR
TEAM AND BUILD IN RESOURCES TO
ADDRESS RISK AT THE OUTSET NOT
AN AFTERTHOUGHT.
THIS IS A DIG AT OUR TEAM FOR
NOT DEVELOPING A CYBERSECURITY
PLAN FOR A SMART INTERSECTION
PROJECT BEFORE WE STARTED
INSTALLING DEVICES IN THE CITY
NETWORK SISTER PROJECTS ARE
YOUR FRIEND.
I'VE TALKED ABOUT UTAH BEFORE.
WE MEET WITH THEM REGULARLY.
WE ATTEND TEAM MEETINGS BECAUSE
KNOWLEDGE SHARING IS ESPECIALLY
AROUND FRICTION POINTS AND
LESSONS LEARNED ARE INVALUABLE
AS NATIONAL DEPLOYMENTS
ACCELERATE AND CONVERGE.
TRUST IS EVERYTHING.
REMEMBER WHO WE'RE BUILDING
THIS FOR AND RECOGNIZE THAT
MARKET FORCES AND PUBLIC
OPINION ARE KEY TO ACCELERATING
ADOPTION NOT JUST TECHNICAL
READINESS.
SO THIS IS OUR OPPORTUNITY TO
SHINE ON A NATIONAL AND
INTERNATIONAL LEVEL.
WE NEED TO SOLIDIFY AND GROW
OUR PARTNERSHIP WITH THE CITY
OF ANN ARBOR.
THESE PROJECTS OVER THE LAST
DECADE ARE VISIONARY AND
IMPORTANT.
WE ARE LEADING THE WAY BUT
WE'RE LACKING IN A FEW AREAS.
FIRST WE DON'T SEEM TO BE IN
ALIGNMENT WITH THE CITY OF AN
ARBOR'S COMPREHENSIVE
TRANSPORTATION PLAN WHICH
FRANKLY IS ODD CONNECTED
VEHICLE TECHNOLOGY IS MENTIONED
BUT THERE AREN'T ANY SPECIFIC
ACTIONS ASSOCIATED WITH THESE
PROJECTS ARE SPECIFIC ACTIONS
ARE THEY COULD BE.
SO WE NEED TO WORK BETTER WITH
THE INTERIM AND FUTURE
TRANSPORTATION MANAGER AND
PUBLIC SERVICES AREA
ADMINISTRATOR AND THIS
COMMITTEE TO ENSURE THAT WE'RE
DEPLOYING WHAT IS NEEDED IN THE
CITY OF ANN ARBOR.
I THINK WE CAN AGREE THAT
THERE'S A BIT OF A DISCONNECT
BETWEEN THE CITY OF ANN ARBOR
AND THE UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
AND I THINK LUKE PUTS IT
SOMETHING LIKE OUR RESOURCES
ARE MISMATCHED AND WHAT I THINK
HE REALLY MEANS AND LUKE
CORRECT ME IF I'M WRONG IS THAT
WE'RE NOT SOLVING THE PROBLEMS
AT THE CITY OF ANN ARBOR NEEDS
TO BE SOLVED OR WE'RE NOT
SOLVING THEM IN A COMPATIBLE
WAY WHERE OUR DESIGN MAY NOT
INTEGRATE COMPLETELY WITH THE
CITY'S INFRASTRUCTURE BUT WE'RE
TRYING TO RECTIFY THAT.
IN FACT, FOR THE ANN HARBOR
CONNECTED ENVIRONMENT 2.0 WE
WILL INSTALL TO OUR ISSUES
ROADSIDE UNITS TO SUPPORT
CURRENT PROJECTS OR I GUESS
CURRENTLY PLANNED PROJECTS ONE
AT STATE STREET AND WILLIAM FOR
THE DEDICATED BUS LANE WHICH
WAS MENTIONED EARLIER AND ONE
ON CENTRAL CAMPUS TO REDUCE
TRAFFIC CONGESTION AT THE NORTH
UNIVERSITY CROSSWALK I THINK
WHICH LUKE HAD MENTIONED.
THE BOTTOM LINE IS THAT WE NEED
TO DO A BETTER JOB MEETING THE
NEEDS OF THE CITY.
DEPLOYING THIS TECHNOLOGY
CANNOT BE DONE JUST TO DO IT.
IT'S NOT JUST RESEARCH THE CITY
NEEDS TO USE THESE PROJECTS FOR
THEIR BENEFIT.
THIS IS A PARTNERSHIP AND WE
NEED TO WORK ON STRENGTHENING
THAT BUT WE DON'T ALWAYS KNOW
HOW TO DO IT.
FOR EXAMPLE, WE'RE FINALIZING
THE CONCEPT OF OPERATIONS FOR
ACE 2.0.
WHAT'S THE BEST WAY TO DO THAT?
WE'RE LOOKING FOR IDEAS AND WE
NEED TO WORK TOGETHER ON
FINDING LONG TERM SOLUTIONS FOR
OPERATIONS AND MAINTENANCE BY
FEBRUARY OF TWENTY TWENTY SEVEN
THE FEDERAL FUNDING WILL BE
EXPANDED.
WHAT ARE WE GOING TO DO AFTER
THAT?
AGAIN, WE NEED TO WORK TOGETHER
ON THIS SO IF I CAN BOIL DOWN
THIS PRESENTATION TO A FEW KEY
TAKEAWAYS IT WOULD BE THIS ONE
.
WE ARE PARTNERS TOO.
THIS IS PART OF A NATIONAL
DEPLOYMENT AND THREE THIS
TECHNOLOGY CAN SAVE LIVES,
INCREASE MOBILITY AND REDUCE
OUR CARBON FOOTPRINT BUT IT
CANNOT BE DEPLOYED FOR
TECHNOLOGY'S SAKE.
IT MUST BE DEPLOYED TO SOLVE
REAL WORLD PROBLEMS PROBLEMS IN
ANN ARBOR AND WITH THAT I JUST
WANTED TO THANK EVERYBODY FOR
HAVING ME HERE TONIGHT.
FEEL FREE TO REACH OUT IF YOU'D
LIKE TO DISCUSS ANY OF THIS IN
FURTHER DETAIL, ESPECIALLY IF
YOU HAVE A GOOD PATH FORWARD
FOR MAKING SURE THAT WE'RE
DEPLOYING CONNECTED TECHNOLOGY
AND SYSTEMS TO SOLVE REAL WORLD
PROBLEMS IN THE CITY OF ANN
ARBOR.
>> THANK YOU.
THANK YOU SO MUCH, DEBBIE, FOR
BRINGING ALL THIS INFORMATION
TO THE COMMISSION.
THERE IS A LOT OF EXCITING WORK
THAT'S GOING TO BE HAPPENING.
SO DOES ANYONE HAVE QUESTIONS
OR COMMENTS FOR DEBBIE
?
WELL WELL, LIKE YOU SAID, I
THINK I'M LOOKING AT WE'RE
LOOKING FORWARD TO CLOSER
COOPERATION WITH THE CITY AND I
THINK THAT INCLUDES ANOTHER
UPDATE TO THIS COMMISSION LATER
THIS SUMMER ISH TIME FRAME.
SO YOU KNOW, I ALWAYS LOOK
FORWARD TO THESE TOPICS WITH
TRY AND WHETHER THERE'S A YEAR
OR SO YEAH.
I JUST I'M VERY MUCH LOOKING
FORWARD TO SEEING WHERE THE
SITES MEETING LIKE THAT.
>> I MEAN, YOU KNOW, ON ONE
HAND IT DOESN'T FEEL GOOD TO BE
A GUINEA PIG SOMETIMES BUT
THERE ARE A LOT OF BENEFITS TO
IT AND HOPEFULLY WE GET TO
SHAPE HOW THIS UNFOLDS ACROSS
THE COUNTRY.
>> I I HAVE TO SAY ON THE
GUINEA PIG THING THIS IS THE
FIRST TIME THAT THERE IS
ACTUALLY ANOTHER DEPLOYMENT
DOING SOMETHING BEFORE US THAT
WE CAN JUST COPY OFF OF THEM
BECAUSE THE FIRST TWO PROJECTS
WHICH ARE BANNED WHAT WAS IT
EIGHT YEARS WHERE THEY WERE
HIRED THEY WERE VERY HARD
BECAUSE YOU'RE ALWAYS INVENTING
IT AND THE SPECIFICATIONS
AREN'T READY.
YOU KNOW, THE INDUSTRY
STANDARDS THEY'RE NOT READY.
SO YOU HAVE TO GUESS AND
SOMETIMES
YOU DON'T GUESS.
RIGHT.
BUT THIS TIME IT'S KIND OF NICE
THAT THESE TOOLS WILL BE
DEVELOPED AND ALMOST OFF THE
SHELF AND SO THAT THERE WILL BE
PROCESSES DEVELOPED WHICH IS
NICE.
SO KIND OF ENJOYING THAT.
BUT THERE'S STILL A LOT OF YOU
KNOW, WHEN WE DID THE SMART
INTERSECTIONS PROJECT SELECTING
YEARS USED WAS PROBLEMATIC
BECAUSE THE SPECIFICATIONS
WEREN'T READY AND SO WE'RE KIND
OF RUNNING INTO THAT WITH THE
NEW PROJECT THE EU AND CHOOSING
THE SUPPLIERS GOING WELL DO WE
WANT THE OLD ONES OR DO WE NEED
TO PICK NEW ONES?
WELL, THEY'RE MY TWO CENTS IN
THERE AND THANK YOU.
THANKS AGAIN.
AND WE LOOK FORWARD TO SEEING
YOU OR YOUR COLLEAGUES BACK
NEXT YEAR FOR AN UPDATE OR
THANK YOU.
>> ALL RIGHT, GOOD.
MOVING ON NEXT UP IS THE TWENTY
TWENTY FOUR TRANSPORTER
COMMISSION ANNUAL REPORT STAFF
HAS ALREADY BEGUN WORK ON THE
ANNUAL REPORT WHICH WOULD BE
BROUGHT BACK TO US IN EARLY
NEXT YEAR FOR FINAL APPROVAL.
BUT CHRIS, I THINK YOU'VE GOT A
DRAFT HERE TO WALK US THROUGH.
>> YEAH.
SO ESSENTIALLY LIKE BRETT
ALREADY SAID, IT IS A DRAFT.
SO COULD YOU MAYBE LIGHTEN IT A
LITTLE BIT SO WE COULD SEE IT A
LITTLE BIT?
YEAH.
I MEAN IT IS IS THAT MUCH
BETTER.
THANK YOU.
YEAH.
OK SO THIS IS A THIS IS A
WORKING DRAFT NOW IF THE
COMMISSION WOULD LIKE ANY
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION OR
ANYTHING ALONG THOSE LINES
PLEASE LET ME KNOW.
BUT YEAH, WE'RE KIND
OF FOLLOWING THE SAME, UH,
STRUCTURE THAT WE HAVE IN
PREVIOUS YEARS.
THIS IS THERE AT A GLANCE RIGHT
NOW.
THIS IS NOT INCLUDING THE
DECEMBER.
SO I'M CURRENTLY HAVE NINE
BOARD MEMBER WITH FIVE AND FIVE
NON-VOTING MEMBERS IN TWENTY
TWENTY FOUR WE HAD ELEVEN
MEETINGS.
WE'VE ONLY ONE CANCELATION AT
TWENTY WE PASS TWENTY MOTIONS.
WE'VE APPOINTED THREE NEW
COMMITTEE MEMBERS AND WE HAD
THREE INFORMATIONAL ITEMS AND
TEN BUSINESS ITEMS AND A TOTAL
OF SEVENTY TWO PUBLIC
COMMUNICATION UM NOW OH THIS IS
KIND OF OUR INTRODUCTION IT'S
STILL PENDING A STATEMENT UH UH
FROM FROM OUR CHAIR WE HAVE HAD
SOME UH UH TRANSPORTATION
COMMISSION MEMBERS LIVE AND
HERE IS WHAT I'M SHOWCASING THE
FORMER AND ALSO THE MONTH THEY
LEFT.
OK, UH NO I AS IN PAST YEARS
WERE ALSO CAPTURING THE
MOTIONS.
NOW IN JANUARY WE HAD THE CHAIR
AND VICE CHAIR ELECTION.
WE ALSO HAD THE THE APPROVAL
OF THE TWENTY TWENTY THREE
ANNUAL UH REPORT AND WE ALSO
HAVE A MOTION FOR THE FISCAL
YEAR OF TWENTY FIVE POLICY
AGENDA IN FEBRUARY WE HAD THE
UH WE HAD AN AMENDMENT YEAH.
WAS CALLED UM WE HAD IN THE
APPROVAL OF TAKING OVER THE
PLANE TRANSFER AND WE HAD IN
FEBRUARY SOME MAJOR UH I
APPROVALS UH UH ARE COMING
SPECIFICALLY AND BURRARD AND I
AND HENRY STREET I GUESS AND
I'M SEEING HERE TWICE I'LL MAKE
TO THE EXTENT UH AND NOW WE
ALSO HAD A RECOMMENDATION TO
INITIATE THE TRUNK LINE
TRANSFER PROCESS AND THE
POSTPONEMENT OF THE TWENTY
TWENTY FOUR THROUGH RESURFACING
PRESENTATIONS.
UM IN MARCH WE HAD THE
RECOMMENDATION FOR THE PARKING
APPROVAL ON PAGE AVENUE UM IN
APRIL THE COMMISSION PASSED NO
MORE WITH THE EMBARGO WE HAD
THE APPROVAL OF THIS THE
MEETING WAS CANCELED DUE TO A
LACK OF QUORUM AND ON JULY 17TH
WE HAD AN INFORMATION SESSION
BECAUSE WE WE DID NOT MEET
QUORUM.
UM, IN AUGUST SOME OF THE
MOTIONS THAT WERE PASSED WAS A
RETENTION OF THE ORIGINAL
BYLAWS UH AND ALSO THE APPROVAL
THE POWERLINE PARTY AND REMOVAL
MOTIONS PASSED IN TWENTY TWENTY
FOUR.
WE DIDN'T HAVE A LOT OF UH
MOTIONS BUT WE DID HAVE A
SIGNIFICANT INCREASE IN THE
AMOUNT OF INFORMATIONAL ITEMS
HERE TO SHOWCASING ALL THE
FEATURES AND ITEMS IN THE
PRESENTATION.
NOW ONE THING I DID ASK ABOUT
VERY BRIEFLY IS THE MOTIONS AND
ACTIONS SHOWCASING THE REPORT
TYPICALLY ARE EXCLUDING YOUR
MEETING AND IT'S JUST BECAUSE
IT'S IT HAPPENS OF MEETING AND
JUST TO KEEP THE REPORT
STRAIGHT AND SIMPLE NOW FOR THE
FUTURE AGENDA ITEMS THIS
SECTION WILL SHOWCASE THE FILES
THAT WERE PRESENTED TO THE
COMMISSION AT THAT GIVEN MONTH
AND IT WILL BE AVAILABLE TO THE
PUBLIC.
SO ANYONE THAT GOES ON START
CAN JUST PUT ON THE FILE THE IN
THE PAST WE'VE HAD WE WE HAD
SOME CONVERSATION ABOUT MAKING
UH LINKS AND TO ENSURE THAT
PEOPLE COULD JUST CLICK ON ADD
THE SPECIFIC DOCUMENT NOW UH MY
HESITANCY TO TO DO THAT IS
BECAUSE ANY CHANGE TO THE CITY
WEBSITE WILL MAKE THOSE LINKS
OBSOLETE.
BUT IF THAT IS SOMETHING THAT
THE COMMISSION ONE WE CAN
DEFINITELY FIND AN AVENUE TO
MOVE FORWARD WITH THAT JUST
UNDERSTANDING THAT IF UH THE
CITY WILL SAY IT IT IN THAT ARE
AROUND CHANGES AND
PRESENTATIONS THAT WE'RE
SHOWCASED TO THE COMMISSION.
UH, WE'RE DOING OBVIOUSLY BEING
AN OBSESSION AND AND YEAH, THE
THAT'S PRETTY THAT'S PRETTY
MUCH IT USUALLY THIS REPORT
CAPTURES ALL OF THE YEARS MORE
THAN AND AND ALL THE ITEMS THAT
THAT WERE BROUGHT WERE BROUGHT
TO THE COMMISSION HERE AS THE
ATTACHMENT.
WE ALSO HAVE THE TRANSPORTATION
COMMISSION ORDINANCE WITH AND
YEAH THAT'S THAT'S PRETTY MUCH
IT FOR OUR REPORT.
IT'S UH IT'S STILL DRAFT AND
I'LL UH I'LL TAKE THIS
OPPORTUNITY TO SPEAK TO THE
COMMISSION AND IF THERE'S ANY
PARTICULAR PARTICULAR
INFORMATION THAT YOU GUYS WOULD
LIKE TO INCLUDE ON YOUR REPORT.
>> UM, YES.
DARMA, UM, THANK YOU FOR THE
PRESENTATION OF THIS.
I WAS WONDERING BECAUSE I SEEM
TO RECALL IN YEARS PAST WHERE
THIS REPORT NOTED THE THINGS
THAT WERE SUBSEQUENTLY PASSED
BY CITY COUNCIL JUST BECAUSE I
THINK YOU KNOW, THAT'S PART
OF THE ACCOMPLISHMENT TO AND I
KNOW THAT YOU'RE TRYING TO
MINIMIZE TEXT SO CHIGGER LEAVE
THAT FEEDBACK AS YOU LIKE AND
THEN, UH, THIS IS JUST A LITTLE
BONE TO PICK WITH.
ONE OF THE THINGS IS CALLED THE
PAULENE PARKING REMOVAL PROJECT
AND YOU KNOW, I KNOW THE ACTION
THAT THIS BODY TOOK WAS TO VOTE
TO APPROVE THE REMOVAL OF THE
PARKING BUT I DON'T THINK
CALLING THE PROJECT THAT IS
ACCURATE OR WHY SO I THINK ON
OTHER ITEMS THAT WERE LIKE THAT
IT WAS VOTED TO REMOVE PARKING
ALONG WHATEVER BUT IT JUST
MAKES IT SOUND LIKE THAT'S WHAT
THE PROJECT'S ABOUT.
AND I KNOW IT'S NOT SO MUCH
MORE.
YEAH, YEAH I CAN DEFINITELY GO
AHEAD AND UPDATE THAT.
LET ME JUST MAKE A NOTE OF THAT
AND YEAH PERFECT.
THANK YOU.
OK OK THERE IS THERE ANY OTHER
I THINK CHRISTIE SAID THAT
YOU'LL SEND ME OR I'LL WRITE UP
THE NOTE FROM THE CHAIR.
DO WE WANT TO HAVE A SECOND
NOTE TYPICALLY IN YEARS PAST
FOR THE THIS REPORT THE CHAIR
WROTE SOMETHING AND THEN
ANOTHER MEMBER WOULD BE GIVEN
THE OPPORTUNITY TO WRITE
SOMETHING AS WELL.
IT'S KNOW HOW DID THE YEAR GO?
WHAT ARE YOU YOUR THOUGHTS ON
THE YEAR, WHAT YOU'RE LOOKING
FORWARD TO FOR THE NEXT YEAR?
KIND OF A FREE FORM, A COUPLE
OF PARAGRAPH SO I'LL OBVIOUSLY
DO THE CHAIR.
YOU KNOW, WE DON'T REALLY HAVE
VERY MANY IF ANY MEMBERS THAT
HAVE BEEN HERE FOR THE YEAR AT
THIS POINT YOU MIGHT BE THE
ONLY ONE LEFT I KNOW MEGHAN
WROTE ONE I THINK SHE WROTE THE
LAST ONE RIGHT.
IS THERE ANYONE ELSE P WOULD BE
UP FOR WRITING A PARAGRAPH OR
TWO YOUR THOUGHTS ON HOW THE
YEAR WENT AND WHAT WE'RE
LOOKING FORWARD TO NEXT YEAR IF
YOU HAD TO SOME EXAMPLES TO
WORK FROM I DON'T THINK I'M THE
RIGHT PERSON TO WRITE THAT
RIGHT.
>> SORRY.
OK, ALL RIGHT WELL LAST YEAR WE
SKIPPED IT SO I GUESS YOU KNOW
IT'S NOT LIKE IN OUR BYLAWS
THAT WE'RE MANDATED TO HAVE IT
SO WE'LL PROBABLY DO THAT AGAIN
THIS YEAR THEN.
ALL RIGHT.
CHRIS SLATED TO TAKE OVER.
DID YOU WANT TO DO THE PHOTO
RIGHT NOW?
>> YEAH.
YEAH.
SO
IT'S TYPICALLY EVERY YEAR WE
TAKE A PHOTO OF THE COMMISSION
NOW I'M GOING TO GIVE EVERYONE
JUST A FEW SECONDS TO GET
CAMERAS ON AND UH, YOUR GET
YOUR FILTER ALL SET UP TO DO
WHATEVER YOU NEED.
>> OK, WE'LL BE TAKING THE
PICTURE IN THREE TO
ONE AND I
SARPY TO UH I LOT OF MOVING
PIECES
.
UH, JUST ONE MORE ON MY COUNT
THREE TO ONE
.
OK AND I THINK WE ARE GOOD TO
GO.
SORRY ABOUT THAT.
THANK YOU.
ALL RIGHT.
SO I WANT THIS TO COME BACK IN
ITS FINAL FORM PROBABLY JANUARY
I'M EXPECTING.
ALL RIGHT.
AND I THINK WE'LL VOTE ON IT AT
THAT POINT TO RELEASE THE OK
NEXT UP STAFF REPORT UPDATES
AND GO THROUGH OUR MONTHLY
STAFF REPORT AND UPDATES
ABSOLUTELY NO SHARING A SCREEN
THIS HOLIDAY VERSION OF THE
CAPITAL UPDATE FILE TWENTY
NINETEEN FOR STREET RESURFACING
PROJECT AND THIS IS A WRAPPED
UP A CONSTRUCTION WORK IS
SUCCESSFULLY COMPLETE AND OUR
STREETS ARE OPEN TO TRAFFIC.
MILLER AVENUE PROJECT WE HAVE
THE KICKOFF MEETING ON THAT AND
THE CONSTRUCTION IS ANTICIPATED
TO BE TO START IN THE SPRING
OF 1995.
THERE IS SOME OVERLAP.
THERE ARE SIX RFP RAPID
RECTANGULAR FLASHING BEACON
THOSE LOCATIONS THERE ALONG
MILLER THEY'RE PART OF THE THE
THE PROJECT BUT THAT PORTION IS
FUNDED BY THE H PCIP HIGHWAY
SAFETY IMPROVEMENT PROGRAM FUND
.
SO IT'S A BIG PROJECT BUT THEN
THERE'S A COORDINATION THE
AVENUE PROJECT IS BUILDING A
PORTION OF THE EQUIPMENT THEN
THE FUNDED PROJECT WILL FINISH
BY THE REST OF THE THE
EQUIPMENT INSTALLATION.
>> MOVING ON TO TALKING ABOUT
PROJECTS CURRENTLY IN PLANNING
AND DESIGN S MAIN STREET THE
SIDEWALK AT PROJECT THIS
PROJECT WILL CONSTRUCT NEW
SIDEWALK ON EAST SIDE OF S MAIN
STREET BETWEEN STADIUM
BOULEVARD AND OUR THERE WAS
SOME DELAY AND THE DELAY WAS IN
EASEMENT ACQUISITION AND NOW
WE'RE EXPECTING THE
CONSTRUCTION WILL BE IN TWENTY
TWENTY SIX FOR OTHER SIDEWALK
PROJECTS THAT ARE IN DESIGN FOR
INDEPENDENCE.
THE ANTICIPATED SCHEDULE FOR
CONSTRUCTION IN 2025 AND
PARKLAND DRIVE ON THE NORTH
SIDE OF THE STREET FROM N14 TO
BRIED THE CONSTRUCTION WILL BE
IN TWENTY TWENTY SIX BROCKMANN
AND THE PRESLAND CONSTRUCTION
IS SCHEDULED FOR TWENTY TWENTY
SIX AND THE DESIGN WORK IS JUST
STARTING FOR THE APPLE AND THE
PIER AREA THAT'S IN THE LOWER
TOWN AREA FOR DEXTER AVENUE
FROM MAYPO TO IRONWOOD THE
CONSTRUCTION IS SCHEDULED FOR
TWENTY TWENTY SIX IN THE
CURRENT FISCAL YEAR FOR
CROSSWALK IMPROVEMENT WE'RE
LOOKING AT INSTALLING RFP THE
FIVE CROSSWALKS THREE OF THEM
ARE ANNOUNCED IN SCHOOL AT
BIRCH HOLLOW PHEASANT RUN AND
CHAMPAIGN.
THERE'S ANOTHER ONE AT BEEKS
AND NORTH FIFTH AND THE FIFTH
ONE IS A SWEATSHIRT AND THE
SCOUSER WASHINGTON BICYCLE
BOLVAR THIS IS IN THE ZIP AND
IT ALSO INCLUDING IN THE
DOWNTOWN AREA CIRCULATION STUDY
.
SO STAFF IS LINING UP THE WORK
LEADING TO THE START OF THE
DESIGN FOR THIS BICYCLE BOLVAR
.
WE ANTICIPATE PUBLIC ENGAGEMENT
AND DESIGN WILL START IN EARLY
2025 AND THIS WAS AND ALREADY
GAVE THE UPGRADE THE UPDATES
FOR SAFE STREET FOR ALL GRANT
FOR NEXT YEAR'S MISCELLANEOUS
UTILITIES PROJECT.
SO THESE ARE UNDERGROUND
UTILITIES AND SOMETIMES IF
THERE IS AN OPPORTUNITY IT WILL
INCLUDE TRANSPORTATION
IMPROVEMENT ITEMS IN THEM.
SO FOR THE HIGHLIGHTED PORTION
ON FIFTH AVENUE THERE WILL BE
AN ADDITION OF BICYCLE
FACILITIES IN THE FORM
OF CONTRA FLOW BIKE LANES
THAT'S GOING TO START FROM
MADISON GOING UP TO PACARD AND
CONTINUE ON TO WILLIAM.
CURRENTLY WE DO NOT HAVE ANY
CONTRAFLOW BIKE LANE THE CITY
AND THIS IS THE FIRST SITE
WE'RE LOOKING TO TO PROVIDE
THAT FACILITY ANOTHER AREA AND
THEY'RE THE SAME PROJECT THAT
IS NEAR HARDING AND
WALLINGFORD.
SO THIS IS IN OUR NEIGHBORHOOD
JUST TO THE IMMEDIATE WEST
OF PAPPAN MIDDLE SCHOOL WE HAVE
AN ONLINE MEETING WITH IS A
PUBLIC MEETING WITH NEIGHBORS
TO TALK ABOUT PROPOSED
INTERSECTION MODIFICATION.
WE RECEIVE COMMENTS AND THERE
WILL BE A SECOND IN-PERSON
MEETING IN FEBRUARY OF TWENTY
TWENTY FIVE MOVING ON TO
DOWNTOWN AREA TO STUDY THIS
STUDY IS NEARING COMPLETION.
THE TEAM IS WORKING ON DRAFTING
THE STUDY REPORT AT THIS POINT
THEY FINISH THE FIRST TWO
CHAPTERS.
THE WHOLE REPORT IS PLANNED TO
BE COMPLETED BY FEBRUARY
OF TWENTY TWENTY FIVE.
SO COMING OUT OF THIS STUDY
THERE ARE TWO GROUPS
OF RECOMMENDATIONS DEPENDING ON
HOW CLOSE THEY ARE TO
IMPLEMENTATION.
THE FIRST GROUP NEAR TERM
THEY INCLUDE TRAFFIC SIGNAL
IMPLEMENTATION.
REMOVAL AT TWO INTERSECTIONS.
THEY INCLUDE TRAFFIC SIGNAL
ONE IS ASHLEY AND LIBERTY AND
REMOVAL AT TWO INTERSECTIONS.
THE OTHERWISE LIBERTY AND
ONE IS ASHLEY AND LIBERTY AND
THOMPSON WASHINGTON STREET BIKE
THE OTHERWISE LIBERTY AND
ONE OF OUR THAT'S THE ONE WE'RE
THOMPSON WASHINGTON STREET BIKE
JUST COVERED .
ONE OF OUR THAT'S THE ONE WE'RE
IT'S GOING TO WE'RE GOING TO
JUST COVERED .
START DESIGN WORK ON THAT.
IT'S GOING TO WE'RE GOING TO
THE STUDY INCLUDE QUITE A FEW
START DESIGN WORK ON THAT.
OTHER AND THE LARGER SCALE
THE STUDY INCLUDE QUITE A FEW
PROJECTS AND THOSE ARE PLANNING
OTHER AND THE LARGER SCALE
IN NATURE FOR THOSE
PROJECTS AND THOSE ARE PLANNING
RECOMMENDATIONS.
IN NATURE FOR THOSE
SO THOSE RECOMMENDATIONS WILL
RECOMMENDATIONS.
REQUIRE FURTHER STUDY AND
SO THOSE RECOMMENDATIONS WILL
ENGINEERING DESIGN BEFORE THEY
REQUIRE FURTHER STUDY AND
CAN BE IMPLEMENTED IN STREET
ENGINEERING DESIGN BEFORE THEY
RECONFIGURATION OR ODAIBA
CAN BE IMPLEMENTED IN STREET
EVALUATE THIS ONE WE
RECONFIGURATION OR ODAIBA
COVERED EARLIER AS PART OF THE
EVALUATE THIS ONE WE
WORK PLAN OUTLOOK FOR NEXT
COVERED EARLIER AS PART OF THE
YEAR.
WORK PLAN OUTLOOK FOR NEXT
PROPOSALS ARE DUE IN THE MIDDLE
YEAR.
OF JANUARY 2025 STATE LINE
PROPOSALS ARE DUE IN THE MIDDLE
JURISDICTION TRANSFER ANALYSIS
OF JANUARY 2025 STATE LINE
THIS ONE THING OF THE
JURISDICTION TRANSFER ANALYSIS
ADMINISTRATION IS DRAFTING
THIS ONE THING OF THE
CORRESPOND IN A FORMAL FORMAT
ADMINISTRATION IS DRAFTING
TO AMNOT AND THE TRANSFER
CORRESPOND IN A FORMAL FORMAT
DISCUSSION WAS AT WITH THAT
TO AMNOT AND THE TRANSFER
WILL START WAS A DIRECT REQUEST
DISCUSSION WAS AT WITH THAT
FROM THE CITY QUIET ZONE STUDY
WILL START WAS A DIRECT REQUEST
AND DESIGN THIS ONE WE ALSO
FROM THE CITY QUIET ZONE STUDY
TALKED BRIEFLY ON THIS ONE
AND DESIGN THIS ONE WE ALSO
EARLIER IN THIS MEETING AND THE
TALKED BRIEFLY ON THIS ONE
DIAGNOSTIC STUDY TEAM REVIEW IS
EARLIER IN THIS MEETING AND THE
SCHEDULED ONE MORE UPDATE AS
DIAGNOSTIC STUDY TEAM REVIEW IS
EARLIER OF THIS WEEK I THINK
SCHEDULED ONE MORE UPDATE AS
THAT DATE IS JANUARY 14TH A
EARLIER OF THIS WEEK I THINK
STREETLIGHT IMPLEMENTATION
THAT DATE IS JANUARY 14TH A
GEIKIE HAS SO FAR REPORTED
STREETLIGHT IMPLEMENTATION
FIXING ONE THOUSAND ONE HUNDRED
GEIKIE HAS SO FAR REPORTED
SEVENTY FIVE STREETLIGHTS IN
FIXING ONE THOUSAND ONE HUNDRED
TWENTY TWENTY FOUR FOR
SEVENTY FIVE STREETLIGHTS IN
NEIGHBORHOOD TRAFFIC CALMING
TWENTY TWENTY FOUR FOR
PROGRAM IN TWENTY TWENTY FIVE
NEIGHBORHOOD TRAFFIC CALMING
WE'RE LOOKING TO START AND
PROGRAM IN TWENTY TWENTY FIVE
COMPLETE THE CONSTRUCTION FOR
WE'RE LOOKING TO START AND
BYRD HENRY AND ARADA PROJECTS.
COMPLETE THE CONSTRUCTION FOR
WE DO HAVE A SIZABLE QUEUE
BYRD HENRY AND ARADA PROJECTS.
AWAITING FOR EVALUATION.
WE DO HAVE A SIZABLE QUEUE
SO CITY IS ALREADY STARTING THE
AWAITING FOR EVALUATION.
EVALUATION WILL WORK FOR KAMAHL
SO CITY IS ALREADY STARTING THE
YOU WANT TO ADD DODDY
MOVING ON
TO TALKING ABOUT THE SECTION
FOR FLASHING YELLOW ARROW
CONVERSION THE GOAL IS TO
ADJUST THE TRAFFIC SIGNAL
CONFIGURATION SO THAT WHEN
THERE IS PEDESTRIANS OR
BICYCLISTS ACTIVATING PUSH
BUTTON TO USE A CROSSWALK, THE
LEFT TURNING MOVEMENT SURVEYS
THE BY THE FLASHING ARROW FOR
THAT SIGNAL CYCLE WILL WILL BE
CANCELED SO THAT FROM THE
SIGNAL OPERATIONS PERSPECTIVE
THE CONFLICT IS REMOVED UNTIL
THE NON-MORAL USER IS SERVICED
THEN IF THERE ARE STILL ENOUGH
TIME THE FLASHING YELLOW ARROW
WILL START
.
IF NOT THEN FOR THAT TO ONE
CYCLE THE FLASHING PORTION OR
PERMISSIVE LEFT TURNING PORTION
FOR THAT CYCLE WILL BE
CANCELED.
SO THE FIRST GROUP ARE
LOCATIONS WHERE THIS CONVERSION
HAS BEEN COMPLETE AND THE
SECOND GROUP OR NEAR THE BOTTOM
OF THIS PAGE ON THE SCREEN IS
WHERE WE ARE STILL LINING UP
WORK TO MAKE THE CONVERSION SO
AFTER THE PREPARATION THIS
DOCUMENT OUR SHOP IS IS WORKING
GADIS HERE ON PARKWAY I BELIEVE
THAT INTERSECTION HAS BEEN
CONVERTED OVER SO THE GOAL IS
TO MINIMIZE THE LOWER TEST.
THERE ARE SOME LOCATIONS THIS
CONVERSION IS NOT FEASIBLE AT
THIS TIME LIKE POLY AND 7TH
WHEN THERE IS NO PUSH BUTTON WE
CANNOT DO THE CONVERSION AS
OF YET.
WE DO WANT TO HAVE PUSHBUTTONS
TO BE EQUIPPED AND INSTALLED AT
THE INTERSECTION SO THAT THE
THE FLASHING LEFT TURN IS NOT
BEING CANCELED AT EVERY SINGLE
EVERY SINGLE CYCLE.
SO THAT IS THE CAPITAL PROJECT
UPDATES AND I GUESS I'VE BEEN
REAL QUICK WHILE YOU'RE STILL
ON THIS TOPIC.
SO IS THAT THE MAIN REASON THAT
THERE IS STILL A SECOND SECTION
OR IS IT HARDWARE THAT IS
MISSING OR NEEDS TO BE
INSTALLED OR IS IT YOU KNOW,
JUST NOT GETTING AROUND TO THE
SOFTWARE CHANGE OR THEIR
STUDIES THAT NEED TO BE DONE?
THANK YOU.
THE REASON WE ARE AFRAID
SLOWING DOWN A LITTLE BIT
COMPARED TO THE PACE FROM
PREVIOUS MONTHS.
THE REASON IS THERE ARE SEVERAL
FOLD FOR THE TWO INTERSECTIONS
SUPPORTING THE 7TH AND THE ARE
THEY ARE THEY THEY ARE
REMAINING HERE BECAUSE OF THE
LACK OF PUSH BUTTON AT THIS
MOMENT FOR SOME OTHER
INTERSECTIONS THAT SAY
BROCKMAN'S A.T.M OR BERTEN AND
PLIMOTH WHILE PADAM PLYMOUTH'S
IS ANOTHER REASON STARTED FROM
LAST WEEKEND ABOUT THE THE
CRASH AND DAMAGE TOTARO OR
CABINET.
BUT ANYWAYS THERE IS ANOTHER
LIKE SUBGROUP IN THIS LIST THAT
WE'RE AWAITING FOR THE VENDOR
TO UPDATE THERE FIRMWARE
BECAUSE THIS IS A REALLY WE CAN
SAY EITHER ADVANCE OR NOT VERY
OFTEN USE FEATURE.
IT SOUNDS GOOD ON PAPER AND
WHEN WE WERE THE FIRST GROUP
OF AGENCIES TO REALLY DEPLOY
THIS AND WE'RE UNCOVERING SOME
ISSUES WITH THE WAS THE
FIRMWARE RELATED TO RESURVEY
SEEING CERTAIN MOVEMENTS AND
THAT JUST BREAKS UP THE
COORDINATION CYCLE SO WE ARE
WAITING FOR SOME FIRMWARE
UPDATES.
THAT'S A RESPONSE FROM THE
VENDOR SO THAT WE CAN WE CAN
CLEAR MOST OF THE THE KIND
OF THE LOCATIONS I THINK YOU
KNOW, SO DO THEY DID THEY SAY
WHEN THE FIRMWARE IS DUE AND WE
HAVE THE THE ALPHA VERSION
MEANING THAT'S THE IN THE
SOFTWARE WORLD THAT'S THE
RELEASE CANDIDATE.
SO THEY ARE THEY ARE BEING
TESTED ON THE BENCH BUT THEY
ARE NOT SAFE ENOUGH TO BE
DEPLOYED IN THE IN THE FIELD.
>> OK, THANKS FOR YOUR CONTINUE
TO WORK ON THIS.
THANK YOU EVERYONE.
>> THANK YOU.
RIGHT FOR THE MONTHLY CRASH
REPORT IF THE SCREEN IS STILL
VISIBLE IN THE MONTH
OF NOVEMBER WE HAD SIX REAL
REAL QUICK BEFORE WE GO OFF
UPDATES KATE ORRIDGE WEATHER
QUICK QUESTION ABOUT THE MGI
TRANSFER.
IT SAYS THE NEXT STEP WAS THE
CITY REQUESTING THE WAS IT
REQUESTING THE TRANSFER,
REQUESTING A CONVERSATION?
I WAS JUST WONDERING IF THERE
WAS TIMING ON THAT AND IF THERE
WERE ANY OTHER SORT
OF PREREQUISITES TO THAT
REQUEST BEING MADE.
IT IS MORE OF A FORMAL PROCESS.
I THINK THAT THEY CORRESPOND AS
HAS BEEN DRAFTED AND MAYBE BY
THIS TIME HE'S ALREADY SIGNED.
SO THE THAT'S MORE OF THE
OFFICIAL KICKOFF ACTION TO
START THE CONVERSATION.
THANKS.
THANK YOU.
ALL RIGHT.
FOR THE MONTH OF NOVEMBER
CRASHED OUT.
WE HAD A TOTAL OF SIX
PEDESTRIAN RELATED CRASHES.
THREE OF THEM RESULTED IN A
LEVEL INJURY.
SO THAT'S THE SERIOUS INJURY
AND THE THREE OTHERS RESULTING
IN MINOR INJURIES FOR
BICYCLISTS.
THE INVOLVED CRASHES IN THE
MONTH OF NOVEMBER WE HAD A
TOTAL OF EIGHT AND THERE WERE
THREE OF THEM RESULTING IN B
LEVEL MINOR INJURY OUTCOME AND
THE THREE OF THEM RESULTING
MINOR OR POSSIBLE INJURY.
THAT'S WHAT I WILL SEE.
AND TWO MORE CRASHES THAT WERE
PROPERTY DAMAGE ONLY NO INJURY.
SO THAT COMPLETES THE STUFF
UPDATE FOR THIS MONTH
.
YES, PETE OK, SO LOOKING AT THE
THREE PEDESTRIAN CRASHES THAT
WE HAD NOVEMBER WE'VE GOT ONE
ON PACARD ONE A LEVEL CRASH AND
PACARD AND THERE WAS ANOTHER
ONE ON THAT SAME STRETCH
OF PACARD IN OCTOBER THREE DAYS
BEFORE CONSIDERING EVERYTHING
THAT'S BEEN GOING ON IN PACARD,
I FEEL LIKE I MEAN YOU HAVE
PERMISSION TO DO SOMETHING HERE
LIKE WE NEED TO REACT TO THIS.
WE NEED TO LOOK AT WHAT QUICK
BUILD STRATEGIES WE HAVE OR
WHAT SIGNS WE CAN IMPLEMENT OR
WHAT WE CAN DO TO TO TRY AND DO
SOMETHING HERE.
I'M REALLY HOPING THAT
LIEUTENANT SCHERBA IS GOING TO
BE IN THE ENGINEERING TEAM ARE
GOING TO BE LOOKING CLOSELY AT
THESE SERIOUS CRASHES ON PACARD
,INCLUDING THE THE ONE THAT
HAS HAPPENED HERE IN DECEMBER
AT PACKARD AND FERNWOOD.
RIGHT.
I AM ASSUMING THAT THERE WAS A
CALLOUT FOR THAT AND THEN IT
QUALIFIES FOR A A A DEEP DOVE
ANALYSIS.
BUT THIS EVERYTHING THAT'S
HAPPENING ON PACARD AND THE
FACT THAT THAT WE'RE WE'RE
FOCUSING ON IT AND WE'RE STILL
OUT OF CONTROL WITH WITH ALL
OF THESE SERIOUS CRASHES IN ONE
MONTH, I MEAN THERE NEEDS TO BE
TELLING US THAT WE NEED TO DO
SOMETHING WE NEED TO BE HEARING
THAT MESSAGE FROM IT AND I
SINCERELY HOPE THAT EVERYONE IS
HEARING THAT MESSAGE.
>> SO THANK YOU.
THANKS, PETE.
AGREED.
LIEUTENANT, YOUR BRIGADE COULD
YOU CONFIRM WHETHER OR NOT
THERE WAS A CALL UP FOR THE
PACKARD AND FERNWOOD RIGHT
FERNWOOD CRASH A FEW WEEKS AGO
OR MAYBE A WEEK OR TWO AGO?
>> I CAN'T REMEMBER.
IT WAS ACTUALLY IT WAS MONDAY.
CORRECT ANSWER PETE'S FIRST
QUESTION I SHARE YOUR I'LL SAY
FRUSTRATION AND CONCERN WITH
WITH THIS CORRIDOR WE JUST
STARTED OUR EXTRA PATROLS AND
CONCENTRATED EFFORTS IN THE
SAFETY CORRIDORS PACARD BEING
ONE OF THEM AND WE'VE HAD WE
CONTINUE TO HAVE CARPET
ACCIDENTS AND SERIOUS CRASHES
IN THAT CORRIDOR.
I KNOW ONE WHEN PD MET WITH
ENGINEERING FOR OUR RECAP
OF THE NUMBER OF ACCIDENTS WE
DID SPEAK OF PACKER AND
BROOKWOOD AND IT'S MY
UNDERSTANDING THAT THERE WAS
POTENTIALLY A LIGHTING ISSUE
THAT COULD BE IMPROVED IN THAT
AREA.
I I KNOW FOR SURE THAT THE
PACKARD AND BROOKWOOD WAS
PEDESTRIAN WAS HIT, WAS NOT IN
THE CROSSWALK AND HOURS
OF DARKNESS AND ALCOHOL WAS A
FACTOR IN THAT AS WELL.
WOULD LIGHTNING HAVE PREVENTED
IT?
I DON'T KNOW.
I KNOW THAT AGAIN THAT WAS
SOMETHING THAT ENGINEERING
BROUGHT UP IN OUR MEETING THAT
WAS AT LEAST ON THE TABLE AT
ONE POINT TO ENHANCE LIGHTING
IN THAT AREA TO POTENTIALLY
PROVIDE BETTER ILLUMINATION FOR
FOR VEHICLES FOR PEOPLE.
YOU KNOW, IT IS A IT'S A
HEAVILY POPULATED AREA WITH
STUDENTS.
IT WAS A WEEKEND NIGHT TIMES
THEY'LL HAVE PARTIES AND
STUDENTS WILL BE WALKING IN AN
INTOXICATED STATE AND MAY NOT
MAKE THE BEST DECISIONS AND IF
THEY CAN HAVE A SAFETY SAFETY
NET, SO TO SPEAK WITH A BETTER
LIGHTING IN THE AREA COULD HELP
POTENTIALLY HAVE PREVENTED THAT
AS FAR AS THE ONE ON TUESDAY
MORNING IT WAS RIGHT WHEN OUR
TRAFFIC
ALL THREE OF OUR CHECK
THAT TRAFFIC OFFICERS ARE
TRAINED RECONSTRUCTIONISTS AND
THEY WERE DISPATCHED TO THE
SCENE SO IN ESSENCE IT WAS A
CALL OUT BY OUR DEFINITION AND
THEY DID DO A WORKUP ON THE
ACCIDENT AND I CAN GIVE US SOME
DETAILS.
SEVENTY ONE YEAR OLD FEMALE WAS
WALKING FROM THE SOUTH SIDE
OF PACARD ACROSS THE FERNWOOD
ACROSS PACARD IN THE CROSSWALK
AT FERNWOOD.
HOWEVER, SHE WITNESS INDICATED
THAT THE PEDESTRIAN WAS WALKING
AGAINST THE WALK SIGNAL SO THE
TRAFFIC WOULD HAVE HAD THE
GREEN LIGHT AS THE PEDE ENTERED
THE CROSSWALK AN EASTBOUND
VEHICLE DID STRIKE HER HAD
SIGNIFICANT INJURIES.
SHE WAS TRANSPORTED.
I DID GET A REPORT EARLIER THIS
AFTERNOON THAT THE VICTIM WAS
STILL LIVING AND HAD SOME
IMPROVEMENT BUT THEY WERE STILL
CONCERNED ABOUT THE SEVERITY
OF THE INJURIES.
I DON'T KNOW EXACTLY BUT I KNOW
THAT THE WHEN THE OFFICER WENT
TO CHECK ON HER HEAD INJURIES
WERE STILL ON.
SO I DON'T KNOW IF IS IN
INTENSIVE CARE BUT IT WAS A
GREATER THAN AVERAGE ERROR UNIT
FOR WITHIN THE HOSPITAL.
SO DEFINITELY SIGNIFICANT
INJURIES AND I REMEMBER ONE
WHEN THIS CAME OUT I SENT AN
EMAIL TO SUSAN AND TO LUKE AND
SUZANNE AND LUKE AND I SAID
ABSOLUTELY NOT.
WE'RE LOOKING FOR IN OUR
QUARTERS AND AGAIN I SHARE YOUR
FRUSTRATION HERE THAT WE JUST
WE JUST STARTED OUR DEDICATED
PATROLS.
I CAN GIVE YOU SOME VERY BASIC
DATA.
I LOOK TO TAKE A LOOK TOOK A
PEEK AT THE STATS BEFORE THE
MEETING TONIGHT AND WE'RE DOING
ABOUT FOUR HOURS PER DAY ON
AVERAGE OF DEDICATED PATROL.
THAT MEANS THAT OFFICERS BE
LOOKING FOR TRAFFIC VIOLATIONS
OR DOING EXTRA PATROLS IN THAT
CORRIDOR.
I DON'T KNOW IF THAT'S GOING TO
INCREASE AS THE PROGRAM GETS
FURTHER LONG.
I'M GOING TO KEEP AN EYE ON
THAT ON THE DATA AND TRY TO
TWEAK THINGS AS NEEDED.
BUT THAT'S WHAT I HAVE TO
REPORT SO FAR AND THE DATA IS
VERY LIMITED IN THAT WE WE
REALLY STARTED TO KICK THIS OFF
THE FIRST PART OF DECEMBER
MIGHT HAVE BEEN DECEMBER 3RD OR
4TH ISH AND HERE WE ARE AT 18.
SO WE ARE ONLY TWO WEEKS INTO
IT AS FAR AS OUR DEDICATED
EFFORTS AND AGAIN VERY
FRUSTRATING WHEN I HEARD THAT
ACCENT COME OUT RIGHT RIGHT
SMACK IN THE MIDDLE OF OUR
QUARTER.
THANK YOU.
THANK VERY MUCH FOR THE UPDATES
.
LUKE, IS THERE ANYTHING ELSE TO
TALK ABOUT BEFORE WE MOVE ON TO
THE LATEST ON REPORTS?
NO, THIS IS A THANK YOU.
SO LIAISON REPORTS ANY
COMMISSIONERS WHO SERVE AS
LIAISON TO ANOTHER BODY OR
ORGANIZATION ARE INVITED NOW TO
PROVIDE UPDATES IF THERE ARE
ANY
.
ALL RIGHT.
SEEING NONE.
LET'S MOVE ON TO COMMISSION
MEMBER COMMUNICATIONS.
ANY OTHER COMMISSIONERS ARE
INVITED TO PROVIDE ANY REPORTS
OR UPDATES IF THEY HAVE
ANYTHING THEY'D LIKE TO TALK
ABOUT.
ALL RIGHT.
AGAIN, SEEING NONE THIS IS OK.
SORRY ERIC.
YEAH, I JUST WANTED TO TALK
BECAUSE THE SECOND PUBLIC
SPEAKER TODAY, LAUREN HE'S A
PERSONAL FRIEND OF MINE AND IT
SHOOK ME UP QUITE A BIT THIS
WEEK WHEN HE WAS HIT HE CALLED
ME I WORK AT THE HOSPITAL AND
CYCLE THAT AREA QUITE OFTEN IT
PACARD AND IT REALLY SHOOK ME
UP AND TO SEE A FRIEND OF MINE
HIT AND INJURED ON A CORRIDOR
THAT I SEE STATISTICS LIKE
WE'RE SEEING TONIGHT WHERE WE
SEE THESE NUMBERS AND LETTERS
DESIGNATED.
IT JUST REALLY BRINGS BACK THE
IDEA THAT THIS ISN'T LIKE AN A
LEVEL CRASH.
THIS IS A PERSON WHOSE LIFE IS
FOREVER ALTERED.
RIGHT.
SO THAT'S REALLY WHAT WE HAVE
TO FOCUS ON HERE IS NOT THE
LEVEL CRASHES NECESSARILY BUT
ALSO THINK ABOUT THE PEOPLE
BEHIND THEM.
I HAD TO CLOSE CALLS MYSELF
THIS WEEK.
I HAD ONE WHERE MY SON WAS
WALKING HOME FROM SCHOOL AND
THANKFULLY AT THE CROSSWALK
THERE'S A BUMP OUT THAT WAS
PLACED THERE A FEW YEARS AGO
AND ONE CAR STOPPED BUT THE
OTHER ONE DID AND HE RECOGNIZED
THAT THE OTHER CAR WAS NOT
GOING TO STOP AND HE WAS ABLE
TO AVOID GETTING HIT.
BUT THAT WAS SCARY AS A PARENT
WATCH OUT.
AND TONIGHT I WAS RIDING MY
BIKE HOME AND I WAS IN OUR
PROTECTED WILLIAM LIKE WAY AND
AN ONCOMING CAR ALMOST HIT ME
TURNING INTO AN INTERSECTION
WHERE I HAD IT RIGHT AWAY AND
THAT YOU KNOW, IT JUST BRINGS
IT HOME IN AGAIN.
I BENEFITED FROM OUR BETTER
INFRASTRUCTURE.
THE CAR WAS ABLE TO SEE ME
BEFORE STRIKING ME AND DID AN
EMERGENCY STOP BUT IT REALLY
BRINGS HOME THE IDEA THAT THESE
KINDS OF PROTECTED
INFRASTRUCTURE THEY'RE NOT A
GUARANTEE OF SAFETY BUT THEY DO
INCREASE SAFETY EVEN IF WE'RE
HIT.
HOPEFULLY THE VEHICLE IS GOING
TO BE HIT HITTING US AT A MUCH
REDUCED SPEED OR CORRIDORS LIKE
PACARD THAT HAVE ZERO
INFRASTRUCTURE OTHER THAN
PAINT.
WE HAVE TO START THINKING ABOUT
WAYS THAT WE CAN IMPROVE AND
LEAVING THEM UNTIL TWENTY
TWENTY SIX BECAUSE OF THE THE
PROBLEMS WITH SPENDING THE
GRANT MONEY ESPECIALLY ON A
PLACE LIKE PACARD I DON'T IT
SHOULD BE ACCEPTABLE ON TWENTY
TWENTY SIX IS A LONG WAY OFF.
A LOT OF PEOPLE ARE GOING TO BE
HURT BETWEEN NOW AND THEN
THAT'S ALL.
THANK YOU VERY MUCH.
ANYONE ELSE.
ALL RIGHT THANKS ERIC.
I AGREE WITH YOU ALL HEART
OF THE MONTHLY CALL FOR AGENDA
ITEMS OPIS YEAH.
>> KIMMICH SORRY I WOULD LIKE
TO IN OUR NEXT MEETING BRING
FORTH A RESOLUTION DESCRIBING
TO AAPS AND REMINDING THEM
OF OUR COMMUNITY'S COMMITMENTS
TO OUR OUR CLIMATE GOALS AND
OUR VMT REDUCTION GOALS AND OUR
VISION ZERO GOALS REMINDING
THEM OF THOSE AS THEY ARE
DESIGNING AND BUILDING THEIR
NEW SCHOOLS.
SO I'D LIKE TO BRING THAT FORTH
AND WITH THE EXPECTATION
OF PASSING ON TO HOPEFULLY TO
CITY COUNCIL FOR THEM TO
APPROVE.
SO IF WE CAN ADD THAT AS A
POTENTIAL AGENDA ITEM WE CAN
TALK MORE ABOUT IT IN THE NEXT
MONTH.
YEAH, THAT SOUNDS GREAT.
AND IF THERE IS ANYTHING
BREWING ON COUNCIL, DARMA WELL
LET US KNOW AND WE CAN
COORDINATE THAT WOULD MAKE A
LOT OF SENSE ORDINATE TO MAKE
SURE IF WE PASS SOMETHING ALONG
TO THEM IT'S SOMETHING THAT
THEY WANT TO ACT ON.
SO ALL RIGHT.
THANK YOU.
AND ANY OTHER AGENDA ITEMS THAT
ARE I MEAN YOU WOULDN'T MIND IF
NOT OF COURSE JUST FEEL FREE AT
ANY TIME TO EMAIL ANY IDEAS TO
US TO ANY OF US LIKE TO HEAR
THEM NEXT MONTH.
I THINK WE ALSO HAVE THE
ELECTIONS RATE PER CHAIR AND
VICE CHAIR LOOK.
SO KEEP THAT IN MIND OR DO THAT
.
I DON'T THINK THERE'S ANYTHING
ELSE I WANTED TO BRING UP.
ALL RIGHT.
SO SPEAKING OF THE NEXT
MEETING, IT WILL BE HELD
WEDNESDAY, JANUARY 15TH AT
SEVEN P.M. IT WILL ALSO BE A
VIRTUAL MEETING LIKE THIS ONE.
>> SO IF THERE ARE NO
OBJECTIONS, WE WILL ADJOURN OUR
DECEMBER 18TH TWO THOUSAND
TWENTY FOUR MEETING ANY
OBJECTIONS SEEING NONE.
THIS MEETING IS ADJOURNED.
THANK YOU EVERYBODY.
THANK YOU.
THANK YOU